---
type: article
title: princetontheolog2711arms
source: https://ia903208.us.archive.org/9/items/princetontheolog2711arms/princetontheolog2711arms.pdf
extracted_at: 2025-12-14T03:41:29-05:00
---

# extraction_engine: pdf/epub:pymupdf

[P000001] fttkE SOUKS X-l Volume XXVII January, 1929 Number i { FEB 1963 The Princeton® Logical Theological Review CONTENTS The Pauline Doctrine of the Resurrection 1 Geerhardus Vos The Textual Criticism of the Old Testament 36 R. D. Wilson The Religion of the Scientifically Minded 60 George Johnson Was Jesus a Modernist? 83 Oswald T. Allis Notes and Notices 120 William Brenton Greene, Jr. (1854-1928) Reviews of Recent Literature 122 Survey of Periodical Literature 147 PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS PRINCETON LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 1929
[P000002] The Princeton Theological Review EDITED FOR THE FACULTY OF PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY BY Oswald T. Allis Each author is solely responsible for the views expressed in his article Notice of discontinuance must be sent to the Publishers ; otherwise subscriptions will be continued Subscription rate. Two Dollars a year, single copies Sixty Cents Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Princeton, N.J. BOOKS REVIEWED Bavinck, H., De Nicuwe OpvoecLing 135 Bavinck, H., Paedagogische Beginselcn 135 Czarnomska, E., The Authentic Literature of Israel 124 Gaebeling, A. C., Unsearchable Riches 140 Gilbert, A. H., Dante’s Conception of Justice 142 Gorce, M.-M., Saint Vincent Ferrier 131 Jefferson, C. E., Cardinal Ideas of Jeremiah 141 Jefferson, C. E., Five World Problems 138 Kalisch, S., Ed., Studies in Ancient and Modern Judaism: Selected Writings of Rabbi Isidor Kalisch 129 Kennett, R. H., Old Testament Essays 129 Marchant, J., Deeds Done for Christ 139 McConnell, F. J., The Christlike God 132 Schofield, C. E., The Gospel of Opportunity 140 Stauffer, M., Ed., China Her Own Interpreter 144 Theory of Evolution Applied to Man, The 123 Tyndall, C. H., Through Science to God 122 Wells, A. R., Know Your Bible ? 137 Wells, A. R., Selected Notes on the International Sunday School Lessons, 1929 ( Peloubet ) 136 Windle, B. C. A., Religions, Past and Present 146 Copyright 1929, by Princeton University Press
[P000003] The Princeton Theological Review JANUARY, 1929 THE PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION First of all we should take note of the close connection between the parousia and the resurrection. It is clearly marked in the structure of 1 Thess. iv. 16: “For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven . . . and the dead in Christ shall rise first.” But this same passage seems further to imply, that the resurrection takes place before Christ in his descent reaches the earth, for it is said that, the dead having been raised, those that are still living, will together with them, be caught up in the clouds, henceforth forever to remain with Him. With this meeting of Christ with his own in the air the statement of iii. 13, where Jesus is represented as coming with “all his saints” is usually brought in some connection. If “saints” here means believers, it will imply that the Lord in his final descent will be accompanied by all his people in an embodied state. It is not absolutely certain, however, that this combination of the two passages is necessary. Two other possibilities exist. The “saints” might designate the sum total of believers previously having their habitation in heaven and now making with Him the first stage of the journey from there to earth. Or “the saints” might refer to angels. Still, inasmuch as Paul nowhere else follows this latter usage, and, on the other hand, frequently calls Christians by the name “saints,” the other view appears the more plausible. If the reference to all the heavenly saints as accompanying Him is adopted, note should be taken of the fact, that, since Jesus comes in visible form, in order to obtain a clear picture of the situation, the saints likewise ought to be conceived in cor-
[P000004] 2 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW poreal manifestation. This, however, would lead us back to the usual view, viz., that the coming “with all his saints” describes not the movement from heaven to a certain place in the air, but rather the final stage, the movement from that meeting-point to earth taken part in by all risen believers, together with those found living at the parousia. Against this interpretation it has been urged, that Paul in iii. 1 3 addresses the Thessalonians in such a way as apparently to distinguish them from the saints accompanying the Lord: “to the end that He may establish your hearts unblamable in holiness before our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.” Still this objection loses force by observing that the Apostle here speaks not of “his saints simply, but of “all his saints ” with the emphasis on the word “all.” The point of the exhortation evidently is that they shall strive to be at the parousia in such a state as to form a worthy contingent of the universal host of saints which will then surround the Lord. It will be perceived that no mention is made in these passages of the resurrection of the wicked. That, as well as the holding of the judgment, happens subsequent to the completion of the earthward descent. More explicit information as to the attending circumstances of the resurrection we obtain in iv. 16. Here we learn of the “shout,” the “voice of the archangel,” and the “trump of God” as accompanying the descent. The sounds thus described serve the purpose of summoning from afar, as it were, the dead to arise, in order to render them ready for their heavenward movement only a little later than Christ has begun his earthward movement, and thus to cause them to meet somewhere between earth and heaven. On the other hand, from vs. 14, “those who are asleep . . . God shall bring ( a%ei ) with Him,” no argument can be drawn in favor of the joint-coming of Christ and the risen saints at the parousia. Here “to bring” ( ayeiv ) refers to the introduction of the saints, jointly with Christ, into the Kingdom of God, not to God’s bringing them to earth in the movement of the parousia. Indeed, the
[P000005] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 3 statement in iv. 17 has been interpreted in the same way, so as to make the meeting of believers with Christ in the air not preparatory to a further earthward descent for judgment, but introductory to an abode with Him in the supernal regions, of which the resulting state would then have to be understood of the preliminary “chiliastic” kingdom, distinct from the final kingdom of God. The preposition used with these three descriptive phrases is iv. It describes the attending circumstances of the act. The following queries arise : ( 1 ) Who is the subject issuing the “shout” (/ceXevoyta), and who are the objects receiving it? (2) What is the relation of the two subjoined terms, the “voice of the archangel,” and the “trump of God,” to the keleusma? The word keleusma is a forcible term used to describe the word of command given, for example, to soldiers, or to sailors rowing in a ship, or to dogs in the chase. Here, however, its meaning is not associated with any of these particular uses. Bringing in the military idea would represent Jesus as by a shout summoning his forces to the conflict with and final victory over the power of evil. But the power of evil remains entirely in the background in the whole representation. The shout is undoubtedly addressed to the dead as dead, that is, as in a state which would render them, figuratively speaking, deaf to every other impact of sound and require to rouse them from death all the authority and omnipotence of God. Both the immediateness and the irresistibleness of the power transmitted by such a sound to a sphere where otherwise no sound is able to penetrate are most strikingly expressed. Now, who is the subject of the keleusma, the utterer of this tremendous command? Is it Christ or God? It has been urged that, since “the Lord” is the subject of the verb “shall come down,” He must likewise be the subject of the act which attends his descent. But the second phrase, “with the voice of the archangel,” shows that this argument has no force. If Christ can come down with the voice of the archangel, He can also descend with a keleusma proceeding from some one
[P000006] 4 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW else, which would in this case be God. Still this, while possible, yields no more than a possibility, and falls short of convincing proof. The statement as a whole rather favors the other view, viz., that Christ is the One issuing the keleusma. Especially the emphasis thrown on the fact that Christ Himself will descend makes us expect the prominence of Christ in the whole transaction, and this would be secured through the issuing of the keleusma from Him. The direct ascription of this to Christ serves the further purpose of rendering the resurrection of believers undeniably certain : being “dead in Christ” they can not fail of participating in the effect of an act or process in which He is the princeps or center. At any rate, whether Christ be the subject of the keleusma, or not, it would yield an incongruous thought to regard Him as the object of the commanding voice. Such a loud summons to Christ who dwells in the immediate presence of God would be wholly out of place ; whereas, when conceived as addressed to the dead, it is in entire harmony with the situation . 1 Assuming then that the keleusma is uttered by Christ, the question next arises, What is the relation to it of the two other terms named, the “voice of the archangel” and the “trump of God” ? Are these coordinated or subordinated conceptions ? Do they define what the keleusma consists in, or do they name two further and separate items? In the former case the construction would more likely have been that with the genitive {fxovy)^ apxayyeXov), and similarly with the other member (o-dXTriyyos deov). The repetition of ev favors the other interpretation. This, however, is not to be so understood as though the keleusma did not take effect until after the voice of the archangel and the trump of God had produced theirs, the latter two wakening the dead, the former summoning the dead already wakened. The three serve the same purpose and their force is cumulative. Who blows the trumpet is not stated; only the voice of the archangel should not be identified with the sound of the trumpet; against this the 1 Kabisch would have the keleusma addressed to Christ.
[P000007] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 5 conjunction teal speaks. It must be granted, however, that the sounding of the eschatological trumpets is elsewhere assigned to the angels, cp. Apoc. x. 7; xi. 15, where, the number being seven, the seven archangels must be meant. Michael, one of the archangels, appears already significantly connected with the resurrection in Dan. xii. 12. The conception of Michael as having a special task in connection with the last things is found also in the Apocalyptic writings ; 2 ancient Jewish traditions make him particularly the blower of the last trumpet. 3 The figure of the trumpet, however, has its root not there but in the Old Testament. Its origin seems to lie in what the Pentateuch relates of a trumpet blown at the giving of the Law : “There were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and a voice of the trumpet exceeding loud” (Ex. xix. 16). According to Isa. xxviii. 13, a great trumpet will be blown to gather the scattered people of God from Assyria and Egypt and summon them to the holy mountain of Jerusalem, where they will worship Jehovah. From the standpoint of the Old Testament this is already semi-eschatological. Full New Testament eschatological significance is given the words from Exodus in the Epistle to the Hebrews, which reminds the readers that they are come “not to a mountain that might be touched 4 and that burned with fire, and unto blackness, and darkness and tempest, and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words . . . but unto the heavenly Jerusalem” (xii. 19). Here the principle of typology is applied via oppositionis : the setting and the external apparatus are the same, but the significance and effects are opposite. 5 Our 2 Cp. Ass. Mos. x. 2; En. x. 11 ; xxiv. 6; xxv. 4; xc. 14. 3 Cp. 4 Esd. vi. 23 ; Or. Syb. iv. 173. 4 “Might be touched” is the expression of the material, tangible character of the mountain ; it has nothing to do with the prohibition of touching the mount in Ex. xix. 12. Its opposite is not the accessibleness, but the spiritualness of the mountain of the New Jerusalem. B Zech. ix. 14 is not meant eschatologically ; here the trumpet is one of war : “And Jehovah shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the Lord Jehovah will blow the trumpet, and will go with whirlwinds of the south.”
[P000008] 6 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW Lord, likewise, in eschatological discourse speaks of the great sound of a trumpet wherewith the angels shall gather the elect (Matt. xxiv. 37). Here also, it will be observed, the angels are the trumpet-blowers. Apart from the trumpets in the Apocalypse, the only other reference to the trumpet is found with Paul himself (1 Cor. xv. 52). Here it is called “the last trump” (eo-^att) ad\7riy£) ; “We shall all be changed . . . at the last trump, for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible.” The adjective “last” in this phrase is usually misunderstood. The Apostle’s meaning is not that during the ages of the world’s history many trumpets have in succession been blown, but that this one, as marking the close of all history, will be the last one to sound. “Last” does not here signify “final” in a chronological sense. It is a technical eschatological term, which does not indicate plurality, but duality ; there is one at the beginning, and there will be another, corresponding to it at the end ; and between these two trumpets lies the whole content of historical eventuation. Finally the genitive (“of God”) added to “trump,” does not mean that God blows it, but simply characterizes it as belonging to the eschatological order of things. By these colorful features Paul makes for us even more grandiose and impressive what under all circumstances can not help being a scene of intense realism. They furnish practically the only material on which our imagination can draw for filling out the large frame of the canvas. It were wrong undoubtedly to reduce all the things mentioned to the rubric of figurative language, in regard to which the author is aware of painting freely, rather than of copying the solid content of prophecy given him by the Spirit. On the other hand we should not overlook the equally obvious fact, that in painting by words, even with the fullest intent of accuracy, the Apostle had to avail himself of a fixed medium of language, which left room for a margin of over-literalism, and whose interpretation by others, while seemingly in full accord with the words recorded, nevertheless introduced an ingredient of inadequacy when compared with the actual intent of Paul. We have here
[P000009] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 7 before us a striking example of the possibility of over-stressing the literalness of the language and imagery used, and yet, while thus seeming to do justice to the writer’s speech, missing in reality the deeper and finer qualities and objectives of his true conception. The literalistic may appear to our human vision nearer the real, but may, nevertheless, owing to our pardonable craving for the concrete, be more subjective than the spiritualized. In view of the original literal, physical association of the words forming the resurrection-terminology with the notions of “sleep” or “causing to rise, or stand up,” the question is asked whether Paul’s idea of the state between death and resurrection is that of sleep or unconsciousness? If God wakes the dead, or if they are roused and made to stand on their feet, what other implication can this have than that they pass out from a sleeping into a waking condition? And, what seems stronger still, the representation of the dead as those who have been put to rest (bed), and consequently now are in that condition, appears inseparable from the phenomena of physical sleep. None the less it would be rash to draw even such theological, eschatological inferences from this as might seem to lie plainly on the surface. These are all words and modes of speech of ur-ancient origin. Undoubtedly at the time of their first springing into usage they had clearly associated with themselves a feeling of their etymological significance, viz., that of a state of dim consciousness or unconsciousness in the dead. But, like all words, especially like all words denoting universal common processes, they were subject to attrition. While, of course, continuing capable to describe the surface facts, they could not fail to lose part of the coloring and implications of the facts, whose apprehension had once asserted itself in their coinage. Except when particular occasion arose to reflect on their original force, they were handled as so many word-signs, into whose primordial picturesqueness the average language-user no longer enquired. Such was undoubtedly the case with words that had no specific revelation-function to perform, being common to the current speech of all. The
[P000010] 8 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW words for “sleep” (/coipav, Koipaadat, KeKoi/xacOai^ are words of this sort. These may have passed through more than one stage of primitive association, but inevitably they suffered the fate of becoming blind words. It is, of course, different with the class of terms that had to serve the purposes of revelation. True, while originally subject to this same attrition-process, Christian thought and feeling could bring back some of the old coloring. But the possibility must likewise be reckoned with that Koipav and /coipao-dcu had come to mean little more than to be placed in the recumbent position of the grave. At the same time it is likely that among believers a special sense of tenderness accompanied the act, reminiscent of the ordinary act of putting a child to bed, with loving hands. Nor need we doubt that as the correlate of physical sleep is awakening, so this idea, never existing or at least long since obliterated in pagan language, might, as it were, undergo a sort of resurrection. Here a vague or obsolete pagan concept came to meet the concomitant sentiment of the Christian mind. But the pagan KoipaaOcu is a sleep to which no waking is joined and in this quite important respect the two words were not by any means analogues. In the case of iyeipeiv it is not merely a single association that differentiates the Christian from the pagan, in the latter the entire idea of a supernatural, miraculous “bringing back from the dead” is lacking, because the supernaturalistic background as a whole is in paganism absent. Consequently Scriptural usage had to translate the term into a totally new circle of belief and understanding : the ordinary, physical iyetpeiv , has received a new, redemptive, superlative sense. All this, and more, it is necessary to remember, before venturing to draw positive inferences from certain terms, and that sometimes even without assuring ourselves that in the later times of paganism a similar drawing of inferences was still a living process. When even pre-Christian paganism does not universally ascribe to the koimomenos or the kekoimemenos a sleep or rest, in the sense of unconsciousness, we may not assume that this ancient, imaginative corollary of the
[P000011] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 9 term was saved out of its semi-oblivion into a new literalness for the Christian faith. Though to the pagan poet there was nothing to look forward to but “nox una longa dormienda,” a sleep without end, the prospect was certainly never such to the early Christian; and if the ideas of “una” and “longa” were wholly eliminated for him, why should the notion of sleeping in the sense of unconsciousness have persisted ? Moreover we have from Paul explicit statements concerning this “intermediate state,” which positively exclude its having been to his mind a state of unconsciousness, such as, apart from dreams, physical sleep ordinarily induces. In 2 Cor. v the whole train of Paul’s reasoning is based on the thought, that there will be a differentiation in feeling (that is, a perceptible difference in the self-reflexive consciousness) in the state after death. Whether he feels clothed with a body or feels naked will be an object of perception to him. To the unconscious dead there is not and can not be any distinction between the one state and the other: all things are alike to them. Even though only the minimum of what appears desirable to Paul, i.e., to die before the parousia, is in store for him, still he expresses the assurance that to be in an “unclothed” (naked) state at home with the Lord, will be a cause of contentment, and the looking forward to this provisional minimum a reason for good courage, which it could not be without the expectation of consciousness in the post-mortem state. Similarly, in Phil. i. 23 the having departed and being with Christ is estimated as “very far better.” To be sure, the estimate is formed in his present mind, but the whole contrast of “worse” or “better” loses its significance, if consciousness, the only standard of difference in appraisal, be denied. The Apostle, then, continues to make use of the common language of the day in teaching about these things, and there is hardly any perceptible effort on his part to correct or modify the latter. What he does is to fill with vital substance language that had so largely become voided of meaning. It has been alleged, it is true, that Paul abstained from the use of the word “death” with reference to departing believers,
[P000012] IO THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW and employed “to sleep” as a euphemism useful in enabling him to do this. This avoidance, it is held, was practised by him with reference to believers only, and not with reference to Christ, where the soteric necessities of the case almost compelled the use of “death.” But, even with that restriction, the theory is not borne out by the facts, for in I Thess. iv. 16 he speaks of “the dead (ve/cpat) in Christ”; and if he used “dead,” he certainly could have used “death,” which is no worse a term. Besides, it is one thing to prefer the use of one word to another on account of aesthetic reasons, and another thing to fill the form of a word with an entirely new content ; the latter is what he would have done in forcing upon the then colorless term KOifiaadaL the significance of death-sleep literally interpreted. The state of death is a state of consciousness, and, as already shown, capable of the sensation of comfort or discomfort, according to the presence or absence of the body, such as results from a garment one is accustomed to wear, and which one misses when it is not on him. It would, perhaps, be too strong to assert, that, apart from this the death-state of believers is an undesirable experience. That it falls short of the acme of blessedness must be acknowledged, and it may be well to call attention to this fact as over against the error of death-sleep, for to the sleeper there is neither pain nor pleasure, a consideration which might incline minds, over-enamored with the idea of absolute quiescence, towards that erroneous theory and the erroneous exegesis on which it is based. The average terminology of burial customs is perhaps to some extent responsible for the error, though as a whole, no doubt, it is born out of a morbidly pessimistic appraisal of life, to which may be added the semi-poetic attraction of the language employed. It has further been urged that i Cor. xi. 30 and 1 Thess. iv. 1 3 cast a reflection on the state of death even for believers. If this were correct it would furnish one more argument against the theory under criticism. It must remain doubtful, however, whether this is not putting too much into the words. To die is ordinarily a painful experience as such, irrespective
[P000013] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION II of the state upon which it introduces. And possibly those who died in the Corinthian church died under special circumstances expressive of divine disapproval of their conduct, so that their departure was a chastisement in itself, leaving out of account altogether what their death might proximately lead them into. It should also be remembered, that, owing to the prevailing expectation of a speedy return of the Lord, Paul’s teaching had not dwelt upon the intermediate state to any large extent, so that his converts in Corinth could more readily regard premature death as a chastisement than we would. In i Thess. iv. 13 the cause for the “sorrowing” which Paul deprecates does not lie in their regarding the state of death as an evil in itself, but in their apprehension of it as an interminable state. The Thessalonians, it appears, had not yet fully assimilated the resurrection truth. Paul’s statements in this passage, with which we hope to deal more fully in another connection, confine themselves strictly to the one matter on which the Thessalonians were disquieted, viz., the presence at the parousia of their fellow-Christians who had died before. On the intermediate state this throws no light whatever. 8 6 It may be well at this point to subjoin a few linguistic remarks on the Pauline usage of speech concerning the resurrection. The largest place is occupied by iyeiptiv, and that in the active voice, God the Father being the acting subject. Of Jesus Himself it is said that He “was raised’’ (“waked”) implying the same relationship of activity on God’s part. The creative aspect of the act standing in the foreground, this is what we should naturally expect. Nowhere is it said of Jesus that He contributed towards his own resurrection, far less that He raised Himself. His role is throughout that of the terminus upon whom God’s resurrective action works, in order that through Him it may work upon others; cp. Rom. iv. 24, 25; vi. 4, 9; vii. 4; viii. 11, 34; x. 9; 1 Cor.vi. I4;xv. 12-17,20; 2 Cor. iv. 14 ; v. 15 ; in these passages partly the active, partly the passive occurs, the former of God, the latter of Jesus. The verb avurravai is much rarer in use than eyci'peiv (cp. Rom. xiv. 9). As the figure allows more of response in the one that is raised, we find here the representation that Christ av€<TT7) (i Thess. iv. 14), involving somewhat of the participative element on the part of Jesus in the transaction. But, apart from this slightly different turn in the application to Jesus, it will be seen at a glance that the verb dvtcrravat is much less in evidence with Paul than the companion-term eyeipeiv . In Pauline contexts in Acts the proportion is not so much in favor of tyetpeiv (cp. Acts xvii. 18, 32 ; xxiii. 6 ; xxiv. 15,
[P000014] 12 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW Having now the immediate precedents and the general terminology before us, we next attempt to obtain an insight into the religious and doctrinal principles underlying the resurrection. As a fact, and that a fact not lacking doctrinal explanation, it is, next to the cross, the outstanding event of redemptive history. But Paul has first made it a focus of fundamental Christian teaching and built around it the entire conception of the faith advocated and propagated by him. In order to gain an insight into how this came about, we must first call to mind, that in the Apostle’s construction of Christian truth, two distinct strands show themselves. The first we may call the forensic one. It revolves around the abnormal 21 ). In regard to the tenses employed the difference between the aorist and perfect in iydpuv should be noticed. The peculiar force of the perfect can be most clearly felt in a passage like 2 Tim. ii. 8: “Remember Jesus Christ risen (iyrjytpixevov ) from -the dead.” The form “risen” here expresses that the experience of the resurrection constitutes Christ “a Risen One” in perpetuum, so that the act of remembering terminates not on his Person in general, but on that capacity of the Person that belongs to Him as “a raised, living One” (cp. i Cor. xv. 16, 17, 20) ; passages with the aor. pass, are frequent. In the sphere of the noun avdo-rao-is has the monopoly, because a corresponding noun lyepats seems to have been in sporadic use only (cp. Matt, xxvii. 53, used of the resurrection of Jesus). A unicum in the New Testament is i^avdo-racris (Phil, iii. 11, used of the resurrection of Paul), of which term more later on. The word anastasis is sometimes active, i.e., the act of producing the resurrection, but it may also be an abstract term, describing the event as such in its generality (Rom. i. 4; 1 Cor. xv. 12). Much less richly represented than the iyetpeiv and avurravat groups is the correlative term Koip.a<rdai, descriptive of the pre-resurrection state ; this is confined to the two contexts of 1 Thess. iv and 1 Cor. xv. Here ve/cpos, though in itself a word of coarser associations, has come to occupy the field. We can not make the distinction, however, as though K.oip.a<j6ai were reserved for believers and vtKpot promiscuously applied to believers and unbelievers in the state of death. The phrase vtupoi iv xpiarw (1 Thess. iv. 16) suffices to prove that the word, while reminding of the nekrosis which is the product of death, is not incapable of being joined to the most noble and intimate relationships of the Christian state. The corruptible is swallowed up by that mystical union with the Lord to which there is no suspension even in death. On the other hand, cp. for Koip.a<r6ai in a dishonorable connection, 1 Cor. xi. 30. There is no difference in the use of the terms surveyed between the resurrection of Jesus and that of believers.
[P000015] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 13 status of man in the objective sphere of guilt, and deals with all that is to be done outside of man, in order to its reversal, so that instead of an aSucos he may become in legal standing a 8(icaio<; before God. The other, while variously denominated, may here for convenience’ sake be called the transforming one. It has to do with everything that pertains to the subjective inward condition of him to whom the grace of God is imparted. The former effects justification, the latter sanctification. The peculiarity of the Pauline system of truth consists in this, that these two complexes of doctrine do not exist side by side in such form as to yield by mere addition of the one to the other the complete body of Paulinism; the situation is rather this, that furnishing along each line a continuous conspect of the gospel, each after a fashion may lay claim to relative completeness. Hence the phenomenon that in the treatment of the Pauline teaching some writers from a sense of personal preference have chosen the one line, and tracing it out, have felt contented that they were offering the student a full-orbed compass of the Apostle’s religious thought. All the time they were forgetting, or perhaps with some intentional partiality ignoring, that alongside of it, there runs the other twin strand making up the other semi-cycle of the teaching. Nor was this unfortunate only because it resulted in incompleteness of rendition, the more serious fact was that even in what thus obtained reproduction the proper balance was lacking. For it stands to reason that in a mind highly doctrinal and synthetic like Paul’s a loose juxtaposition of two tracks of thinking without at least an attempt at logical correlation is inconceivable. In such a matter Paul’s mind as a theological thinker was far more exacting than theirs who think that with their facile leaning over to one favored side they have done justice to the genius of the greatest constructive mind ever at work on the data of Christianity. So far this is only looking at the question from the purely human standpoint of the religious thinker. But we dare not
[P000016] 14 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW dismiss the point without reminding ourselves that the completeness and logical coherence of the truth taught through its organs is a preeminent postulate of revelation. It is for these reasons a priori to be expected that the two strands discoverable shall not be entirely equal in rank within the system of doctrine, for that would yield a dualism hard to put up with. And so soon as the question is raised through the principial superiority of which of the two spheres the necessary balance and symmetry can be safeguarded, the solution can be hardly other than that the forensic principle is supreme and keeps in subordination to itself the transforming principle. To be sure, justification and sanctification are not the same, and an endless amount of harm has been done by the short-sighted attempt to identify them. But neither are these two independent one of the other ; the one sets the goal and fixes the direction, the other follows. What has darkened the vision of some in this matter was the taking for granted that for superiority in leading position all that is needed is greater bulk and outstanding prominence on either side. It was unavoidable that in practical communications directed to the building up of disciples in the faith, such as the Epistles, the viewpoint of sanctification could easily come to overshadow the more isolated and momentary problem of justification. This would undoubtedly have happened had not the latter principle found such emphatic and ineffacable testimony borne to it, as is the case, for example, in the Epistle to the Galatians and certain sections of Romans. Coming now specifically to the resurrection, this before aught else would seem to be exempt from deplacement out of the transforming into the forensic sphere. It signifies in fact the most radical and all-inclusive transforming event within the entire range of the believer’s experience of salvation. It is equivalent to “becoming a new creation,” and what could be excluded from such a sweep of renewal? The one in Christ is tccuvr) KTi<n<>. In Him the old things have passed away, all things from that point on became new . 7 And what is true 7 It is usually taken for granted, not merely in homiletical usage, but
[P000017] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 15 of the earthly prototype of the eschatological change must ipso facto hold true of the resurrection part of the supreme crisis at the end. There likewise in an absolutely unprecedented manner and to an unprecedented extent the newness furnishes the light in which all things are placed. And yet it were, from the point of view of Paul’s teaching, a mistake to confound prominence here with undivided supremacy. To his view the resurrection with all that clusters around it, has behind it a still more potential principle, a principle from which in fact it springs, and in whose depths it lies anchored. And this deeper principle is that of the acquisition of righteousness, a forensic principle through and through, and yet no less than the resurrection a transforming principle also. It is especially by considering the nexus between Christ and the believer that this can be most clearly perceived: in the justification of Christ lies the certainty and the root of the Christian’s resurrection. For the supreme fruit of Christ’s justification, on the basis of passive and active obedience, is nothing else but the Spirit, and in turn the Spirit bears in Himself the efficacious principle of all transformation to come, the resurrection with its entire compass included. Resurrection thus comes out of justification, and justification comes, likewise in commentary-exposition, that Kauri) kti'ctis describes the renovation in the subjective condition of the believer, if not entirely so, at least chiefly. The rendering “new creature has promoted this partial misunderstanding. But ktisis signifies “creation” no less commonly than “creature.” The context shows that Paul’s real point of view is better reproduced by “a new creation.” Through the redemptive provision afforded by God in Christ, and specifically by one’s ctvai iv xpiarw the Christian has been transferred into a new world, a world which differs toto genere in all its characters, its whole environment, and (this could hardly remain unexpressed in such a sweeping statement) differs likewise principally as to the basis of objective righteousness on which the new man stands, from the present world. Nor is it necessary to reach this by inference ; the context says it in so many words : “But all things are of God, who reconciled us through Christ to Himself ... to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself.” And that this “reconciliation” is an objective process (atonement plus justification) appears plainly from the following words “not reckoning unto them their trespasses.” For the sense of “creation” attaching to ktisis cp. Heb. ix. 11.
[P000018] i6 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW after a manner most carefully to be defined, out of the resurrection; not, be it noted, out of the spiritual resurrection of the believer himself, but out of the resurrection of Christ. On the basis of merit this is so. Christ’s resurrection was the de facto declaration of God in regard to his being just. His quickening bears in itself the testimony of his justification. God, through suspending the forces of death operating on Him, declared that the ultimate, the supreme consequence of sin had reached its termination. In other words, resurrection had annulled the sentence of condemnation. This is the simple meaning of Rom. iv. 25 : “who was delivered up for our trespasses, and was raised for our justification.” The preposition occurring in each of the two clauses, must have, of course, in each the same constructional force; what this force is the first clause shows beyond all possibility of doubt: Christ was delivered up to death “on account of our trespasses.” Our trespasses were the ideally efficient cause of his death ( Side. acc.). If it is to correspond to this, the second clause must mean that He was raised “on account of our justification” ( &o c. acc.). Because in his completed death our justification was virtually secured, it needed only the passing of death from ofif Him, and the consequent substitution of life for death to declare this. Not, therefore, to render our justification more easy to apply, nor even to release in Him forces working for its application, was He raised. There was in his coming to life something far more efficacious than a mere demonstration or proclamation might have been. 8 A passage with a similar trend of thought is Rom. viii. 23. Here the technical term vloOeata (“adoption”) is introduced in close connection with the “redemption of the body,” i.e., the eschatological resurrection. It is not merely in the grace of 8 The idea here found in the verse has nothing to do with the doctrine of eternal justification. What is referred to is not an eternal, i.e., supratemporal act, but an act in history. It was simply the ideal side in the mind of God to the visible, temporal occurrence of the suspension of the death of Christ.
[P000019] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 1 7 this present life that the believer is given to taste the fruition of his release from the forensic power of sin, the same principle works through to the very end, so long as there shall still remains something to be set right, some sequela of sin even in the sphere of the body to be removed. Here it can be plainly observed how the one thought passes over into the other: “adoption” is by parentage a forensic concept ; yet it fulfills itself in the bodily transforming change of the resurrection. It has been not unplausibly held, that this forensic aspect of the resurrection as a declarative, vindicatory, justifying act, forms a very old, if not perhaps the oldest, element in Paul’s doctrine on the subject. To Judaism the belief largely bore this meaning. Paul could later truthfully say, that in preaching the resurrection he defended the Pharisaic position, not merely through insistence upon the fact, but also so far as this fact amounted to a vindication of the people of God (Acts xxiii. 6). In i Cor. xv. 30-32 the resurrection is viewed as a reward for the incurring of danger and the daily dying undergone. In vss. 55-57 of the same context it is pictured as the swallowing up of death in victory, and death is here pointedly named as the penalty for sin imposed by the Law, so that the resurrection is the final removal of the condemnation of sin. In vs. 58 it appears even as a recompense for the labor accomplished, hence as an incentive for the intense prosecution of this labor : “Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not vain in the Lord.” After the long disquisition on the raising of the dead the “wherefore” can have no other meaning than that the motive of the exhortation lies in the sure prospect of the resurrection. The “forasmuch as ye know” relates in like manner to the unshakable assurance of this culminating event in which all rewards of the pious will be summed up. Of course, all this must be understood in harmony with the Apostle’s principle of salvation through grace, apart from works, as must his doctrine of reward in the judgment generally. Side by side, therefore, with the resemblance between
[P000020] i8 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW it and the Jewish doctrine, the vital difference between meritorious and non-meritorious ground of bestowal should never be overlooked. Still it remains worth observing, that the Apostle has incorporated this idea of the resurrection in his forensic scheme. It seems a pity that in the more prominent associations of our Easter observance so little place has been left to it. The Pauline remembrance of the supreme fact, so significant for redemption from sin, and the modern-Christian celebration of the feast have gradually become two quite different things. Who at the present time thinks of Easter as intended and adapted to fill the soul with a new jubilant assurance of the forgiveness of sin and the guarantee of the inheritance of eternal life ? 9 We hasten on, however, to outline the other, more familiar aspect of the event. That it bears such an aspect so far as the body is concerned lies on the surface. That this is a transformation effected by Christ Himself is likewise plain ; and still further that the transformation is analogous to that produced in the body of Christ Himself at his own resurrection. All this is implied in the classical passage Phil. iii. 21, where the expressive term /j-eTaa^rj/iaT^eLv is employed for describing it. The question, whether this transformation of the body takes place in the believing portion of the Church then found 9 Much light falls on the forensic significance of the resurrection in believers from a comparison with the case of Christ’s resurrection. The Spirit is in Christ the seal and fruit of his righteousness, and at the same time it is in Him through his exalted state, produced by the resurrection, the perpetual witness of the continuous status of righteousness in which He exists. In Him unintermittedly springs up that fountain of justification, from which all believers draw. To say that forgiveness of sin procured through the imputation of Christ’s merit constitutes only the initial act in the Christian life, and that thereafter, the slate having been wiped clean, there is no further need nor allowance of recourse to it, all being thenceforth staked on sanctification, is, apart from all other criticism, wrong, because it ignores forensic righteousness as a vital factor in the exalted state of the Saviour. If this were not so, it would remain unexplainable why, in the matter of justification, Paul directs the gaze of faith not merely to the cross retrospectively, but likewise upward to the glorified existence of Christ in heaven, wherein all the merit of the cross is laid up and made available forever.
[P000021] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 19 living, or in all found alive at the parousia may be here left to one side. Nor can it make any difference for our present purpose, whether the change spoken of shall coincide with the raising of believers, or constitute a separate subsequent act. A far more complicated problem is whether at the parousia this transformation will concern not the somatic condition of believers only, but will include a corresponding psychical change, affecting more particularly that side of human nature where the body is most closely interrelated with the soul. A priori it seems difficult to deny this. The opposite would involve a kind of physical construction of the resurrectionprinciple, such as we may well hesitate to ascribe to Paul. Bodily the resurrection certainly is, and every attempt to dephysicize it, so often inspired by a dislike of the supernatural on its material side, amounts to an exegetical tour de force, so flagrant as to be not worth losing many words over. Now, if there be a somatic resurrection, we can not otherwise conceive of it than as a somatic transformation. There is not a simple return of what was lost in death; the organism returned is returned endowed and equipped with new powers ; it is richer, even apart from the removal of its sin-caused defects. The normal, to be sure, is restored, but to it there are added faculties and qualities which should be regarded supernormal from the standpoint of the present state of existence. To receive back a body, and to have a body at all is much (2 Cor. v. 1-9), but we may feel sure that it was not to Paul exhaustive of the grace of the resurrection, even considered from the somatic point of view. Nor do we lack information to that effect. According to 1 Cor. xv. 45-49 believers shall bear after Christ the image He Himself obtained in his own resurrection. And this is not a case of mere analogy as to radiancy of appearance through externally imposed glory, it is something deeper and farther-reaching, intensely real, although we may not be able to form a concrete conception of it any more perhaps than could Paul himself. With all the difference inevitably existing between the two cases the opi<rdr)vai
[P000022] 20 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW iv 8vvdfj.ei avaaTaaewi veicpSiv of Rom. i. 4 must have its counterpart in the resurrection of believers ; in their case likewise there must take place an investment with SvvafM<;.10 The resurrection-idea has been too much concentrated upon its somatic aspect per se; it has been taken too much for granted that the bare body is all that is needed for the sake of restoring the completeness of human nature. If we may judge of the resurrection of believers mutatis mutandis after the analogy of that of Christ, we shall have to believe that the event will mark the introduction upon a new world 10 The analogy, and its bearing upon our problem become most clear when the passage, Rom. i. 3-4, is somewhat closely analyzed. Here we read that Jesus was opicrOels vtos 6toil iv Svvapt 1 Kara irvtvpa ayiwcrvvr)'; i£ dvacrrao-ttos veuptov. The clause stands in parallelism to the one in vs. 3 : tov ytvop.evov in cnripparos Aavtlb Kara capita. It will be noticed that the following members correspond to each other in the two clauses : ytvop.tvo% opicrdcLs; Kara capita Kara wtvpa aytwcvvr]^', (K tnrtpp.aTO'; AauetS i£ avacraceais vtKpwv. The reference is not to two coexisting states in the make-up of the Saviour but to two successive stages in his life. There was first a ytvtcBai Kara capita, then a 'optcdrjvai Kara irvtvp.a. The two prepositional phrases have adverbial force, yet so as to throw emphasis on the result no less than on the initial act : He became, as to his sarkic existence, and He was “of the seed of David.” The opLcOrjvai Paul refers to is not an abstract determination, but an effectual installation, with bestowal of the requisite energy pertaining to the new state. Paul seems to avoid the repetition of yevoptcvov, not so much for stylistic reasons, but because it might have suggested, even before the reading of the sentence to the end could correct this, that at the resurrection the sonship of Christ, as such, first originated, whereas his actual meaning is that the sonship Kara 8vvap.1v there began to enter into operation. By the twofold Kara the manner of each state of existence is contrasted, by the twofold ck the sphere of origin of each. As to the one He was “from the seed of David,” as to the other He was “out of resurrection from the dead.” The resurrection (both of Jesus and of believers) is therefore according to Paul the entering upon a new phase of sonship characterized by the possession and exercise of unique supernatural power. That this should apply to Christ’s body alone, or to the operation by Christ of somatic power on the bodies of believers alone, while not here expressly denied, is in itself highly implausible. The above interpretation does not, of course, imply that Paul denied the supernatural conception of Jesus by the Spirit. Precisely, because speaking of the pneuma-state in the absolute eschatological sense, he could disregard here the previous Spirit-birth and the Spirit-endowment at the baptism.
[P000023] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 21 constructed upon a new superabundantly dynamic plane. It is for the body, no less than for the soul a new birth. The resurrection constitutes, as it were, the womb of the new aeon, out of which believers issue as, in a new, altogether unprecedented, sense, sons of God : “They are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection,” therefore they neither marry, nor are given in marriage (Lk. xx. 35-36). This whole idea of the avdaTacn<i as a genesis into a higher world opens up the largest conceivable prospect into a life of new structure and new potencies for the entire state of the Christian man. There exists a certain analogy at this point between the avdaraais and the cosmical TraXiyyeveaCa of Matt. xix. 28. Thus far, however, our discussion has confined itself to the resurrection of the body. A continuity has been established between this as it took place in Jesus, and what will take place at the parousia in them that are Christ’s, and the securing of this continuity has been found to be due to no one else than to Christ Himself. When desiring to construct from Paul’s statements an organic bond between the entire Christian life here upon earth and the resurrection at the end, we feel perhaps that what has been said above leaves us in a degree unsatisfied. The leap we had to make from Jesus’ resurrection to the believer’s leaves, as it were, the intermediate spaces unfilled, and thus threatens to destroy the true organic coherence. What we desire is to be able to show, that the believer’s whole ethico-religious existence, the sum-total of his Christian experience and progress, all that is distinctive of his life and conduct demands being viewed as a preparation for the crowning grace of the resurrection. Only by showing this can the Apostle’s teaching be fully cleared of the charge of incoherency between his religion and his eschatology. We believe it is possible to do this. The passages in which the entrance upon the Christian state is represented as a being raised with Christ come here under consideration. As shown before, they are semi-eschatological in import ; they take for granted that in principle the believer has been translated into the higher world of the new aeon. Still for this very reason
[P000024] 22 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW they establish a real, a vital relationship between what is enjoyed already, and what will be received at the end, for it is characteristic of the principle to lead unto the final fulfilment. Thus, according to Rom. vi. 5, the likeness (“the image made like”) of the Saviour’s resurrection is to be reproduced in the Christian. Even now believers are to reckon themselves alive unto God in Christ Jesus, the Lord (vs. 23). Those who have the vision of the glorified Christ are through it “transformed into the same image from glory to glory.” Whatever may be the exact meaning of these mysterious words it is at any rate plain, that a transforming influence proceeds from Christ, such an influence as He could bring to bear upon us only in the capacity of the glorified, i.e., the risen Christ, and which has for its goal the acquisition of the same glory-image on the part of believers. In a different form the same principle of continuity between the present spiritual life and the resurrection shows itself, where believers are exhorted to strive after sanctification with the thought and desire in mind that at the day of the Lord’s coming they may be presented to Him in a sanctified condition, which will at the same time cause rejoicing in those who have labored for them and make the event objectively productive of greater grace and joy. On behalf of the Thessalonians Paul gives expression to the hope, that the Lord may make them to increase and abound to the end that He may establish their hearts unblamable in holiness at the coming of the Lord Jesus with all his saints, (1 Thess. iii. 12; v. 23). Further, we shall have to add to these indications the complex of ideas gathering around the phrase “to be in Christ.” 11 It is not 11 It is not essential to assert that the two formulas ev xpio-ra! and iv irvevfjxiTi are entirely synonymous and coextensive, nor that the formula “in Christ” is coined after the analogy of “in the Spirit,” as Deismann thinks (Die neutestamentliche Formel in Christo-Jesu, 1892). To the contrary, Walter (Der religiose Gehalt des Galaterbriefs, 1904, pp. 122- 144) has shown that the usage of the former considerably overlaps the limits within which the latter would be applicable ; it has a large forensic connotation. But where “in Christ” pertains to the mystical sphere, the two formulas are practically interchangeable.
[P000025] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 23 Pauline to conceive of believers who are in Christ as enveloped by Him after a quietistic, unproductive fashion. The relation is one that has its intent determined by their destiny to share after their own degree in his glorified state. Even dead believers are in the intermediate period before the resurrection “dead in Christ” (1 Thess. iv. 16). The statement is made in order to assure those then living of their certitude of being themselves changed in due time. If Christ gathers to and envelopes in Himself all his own with such comprehensiveness that even the “dead” are never separated from Him, nor He from them, then the conclusion is surely justified, that the entire activity He directs towards them aims at raising them unto likeness with Himself. Their life and lot are so inwrought with Christ’s that the general law of happening in the large phases of his experience must repeat itself in them : “If so be that we suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified with Him.” Finally, in a more un-Christological form the principle of continuity and causal nexus between the growth of the state in grace here and the inheritance of the resurrection has found striking expression in the figure of sowing and harvesting: “Whatsoever a man soweth, shall he also reap. For he that soweth unto his own flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he that soweth unto the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal life. And let us not be weary in well-doing : for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not” (Gal. vi. 7-9). A connection and proportionateness between the future life of the Christian and his conduct here are affirmed in this no less than in the foregoing passages. 12 The same problem thus far considered in terms of Christology admits of being studied likewise under the head of the 12 It might seem almost unpardonable here to pass by the words of Phil. iii. 10, 11 : “Becoming conformed unto his death, if by any means I may attain unto the resurrection from the dead.” The thought here expressed, however, seems to go beyond the import of the above passage in so far as the obtaining of the resurrection as such would seem to be made dependent on Paul’s Christian striving. The passage will be discussed in a subsequent connection.
[P000026] 24 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW doctrine and function of the Holy Spirit. In order to perceive this the reader should endeavor to make clear to himself how intimate a connection there exists between the Holy Spirit and Eschatology. The lack of recognition of this fact, so common among even doctrinally inclined Christians is mostly due to the eclipse which the Spirit’s eschatological task has suffered on account of his soteric work in the present life. The ubiquitousness and monergism of the Spirit’s influence in the gracious processes we now experience have, as it were, unduly contracted our vision, so that after having emphasized the all-inclusiveness of this work, we forget that we have forgotten, or merely counted in pro forma the other hemisphere pertaining to the Spirit, that dealing with the introduction into and the abode in the life to come. Paul has not left us in uncertainty or unclearness in regard to this part of the Spirit’s working. In I Cor. xv, and other classical contexts the subject is placed in such prominence and the light of revelation so superabundantly focussed upon it, that some have even felt, as though it outshone somewhat the Christglory ordinarily so inseparable from the things in question. But soteriology so long had the priority in the Church’s familiarizing herself with the Spirit, that the other part of the subject had little chance left of obtruding itself and so gaining the attention it is by nature entitled to. What makes this relative neglect all the more unexplainable, and up to a certain point inexcusable is the fact that after all the Spirit’s eschatological functions are simply the prolongation of his work in the soteriological sphere. But be this as it may, now that in more recent times the attention of Scripture students has been attracted to the facts the intensity of occupation with them has more than made up for the shortcomings of former times. The connection of the Spirit with Eschatology reaches back far into the Old Testament. The fundamental sense of mi is in the Hebrew, and other Semitic languages, that of air in motion, whilst with the Greek rrvev^athe notion of air at rest seems to have been chiefly associated. This rendered the Hebrew term fitted for describing the Spirit on his energiz-
[P000027] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 25 ing, active side, which further falls in with his ultimate eschatological function of producing supernatural effects on the highest plane. Thus, the Spirit comes to be linked together with eschatology. We can observe this along several lines of thought. There is first the idea that the Spirit through certain extraordinary manifestations of the supernatural, in certain prophetic signs, heralds the near approach of the future world. Thus in Joel iii. 1 ff . 13 the outpouring of the Spirit on all flesh is described as taking place “before the great and terrible day of Jehovah comes.” 14 It is not excluded by this, that the Spirit will also have his place within the new era itself, but this is not indicated here. The Spirit works these signs, not because He stands for the eschatological as such, for the latter idea has not yet been reached. Next, the Spirit is brought within the eschatological field itself as furnishing the official equipment of the Messiah. It will be noted that in the passages where this occurs (Isa. xi. 2 ; xxviii. 5 ; xlii. 1 ; lix. 21 ( ?) ; lxi. 1 ) the Messiah receives the Spirit as a permanent possession. In calling this equipment with the Spirit official we do not mean to imply that it is externally attached to the Messiah, not affecting his own subjective religious life, for He is not merely a Spirit of wisdom and understanding, of counsel and might, but also a “Spirit of knowledge and fear of Jehovah.” Still the prophet does 13 ii. 28 ff. in the English versions. 14 Volz (Der Geist Gottes und die verwandten Erscheinungen im Alten Testament und im anschliessenden Judenthum, 1910, p. 93) while explaining Joel as above, thinks that Peter in Acts ii. 16-21 follows a different exegesis, because representing the disciples as permanently possesseed of the Spirit. The contrary is true: Peter distinctly quotes the entire Joel-passage, including the words which put the phenomena named before the coming of the day of Jehovah (vs. 20), and which assign a period of some length during which opportunity is afforded to call upon the name of Jehovah in order to ultimate salvation in the day of judgment (vs. 21). The Spirit’s working is here no less sub-^eschatological than it is in Joel. Peter is even more explicit than Joel in regard to this point, for he modifies the quotation by introducing into it the phrase “in the last days,” a phrase which in the New Testament is everywhere subeschatological.
[P000028] 26 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW not mean to describe what the Spirit is for the Messiah Himself, but what through the Messiah He comes to be for the people. Thirdly, the Spirit appears as the source of the future new life of Israel, especially of the ethico-religious renewal, and thus first becomes suggestive of the eschatological state itself. To this head belong the following passages : Isa. xxxii. 15-17; xliv. 3; lix. 21 (?) ; Ez. xxxvi. 27; xxxvii. 14; xxxix. 29. It will be observed that in these prophecies the sending of the Spirit is expected not from the Messiah but directly from Jehovah Himself, although the statements occur in prophecies containing the figure of the Messiah. The emphasis rests on the initial act as productive of new conditions; at the same time the terms used show that the presence and working of the Spirit are not restricted to the first introduction of the eschatological state, but characterize the latter in continuance. The land and the nation become permanent receptacles of the Spirit. The promise assumes in Ez. xxxvi. 26 an individualizing form. Fourthly, we must take into account that in the Old Testament the word “Spirit” appears as the comprehensive formula for the transcendental, the supernatural. In all the manifestations of the Spirit a supernatural reality projects itself into the experience of man, and thus the sphere whence such manifestations come can be named after the power to which they are proximately traced. This is in harmony with the two-fold aspect of the wind, which is at the same time a concrete force, and a supernal element seeming to come from above. But the Spirit stands for the supernatural not merely in so far as the latter connotes the miraculous, but likewise in so far as it is sovereign over against the creature: it “blows where it listeth.” In man the pneumatic awakes the awe pertaining to the supernatural, and exposes to the same danger. Even in his ordinary life the prophet is, on account of his pneumatic character, as it were concentrated upon a higher world, “he sits alone because of Jehovah’s hand” (Jer. xv. 17). The idea mentioned in the fourth place is the one which
[P000029] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 27 has undergone a somewhat further development in the Apocalyptic literature. Here at least the Spirit is explicitly described as a Spirit of eternal life ( Orac . Sib. iii. 771), a Spirit of holiness pertaining to paradise, named in connection with the tree of life {Test. Levi, xviii. 11). Still further goes the Rabbinical Theology when it brings the Spirit specifically into connection with the resurrection : “Holiness leads to the Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit leads to the resurrection.” 15 The impression that the period of Judaism felt itself to be an unpneumatic period is sometimes due to an unwarranted comparison with the following Spirit-filled days of the early Christian Church. Both the wise men and the Apocalyptic writers of that period feel themselves men of a higher divine rank. Sometimes the pneumatic state vaunted of assumed the form of a translation into the heavenly sphere. Coming back to Paul we may adopt for guidance the twofold aspect in which the eschatological function of the Spirit appears in his teaching. On the one hand the Spirit is the resurrection-source, on the other He appears as the substratum of the resurrection-life, the element, as it were, in which, as in its circumambient atmosphere the life of the coming aeon shall be lived. He produces the event and in continuance underlies the state which is the result of it. He is Creator and Sustainer at once, the Creator Spiritus and the Providence of the supernatural state of the future life in one. As to the first, Rom. viii. 1 1 affirms that God Sta tov ivoikovvto<; avrov nyeo/JutTO? iv v\Tiv or Sea to ivoLKOvv 7rvevfJLa shall give life to the mortal bodies of the readers. Hvev/j,a is here not the human spirit, psychologically conceived, as vs. 10 at first sight might make us assume. It is the divine Pneuma that is referred to, to be sure, in its intimate union and close association with the believer’s person. Hence in vs. 1 1 there is substituted for the simple pneuma the full definition “the Spirit of Him that raised Jesus from the dead.” In this designation of God resides the force of the argument : what God 15 Cp. the author’s article on “Eschatology and the Spirit in Paul” in the Princeton Biblical and Theological Studies (1912), pp. 211-259.
[P000030] 28 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW did for Jesus He will do for the believer likewise . 16 It is presupposed by the Apostle, though not expressed in so many words, that God raised Jesus through the Spirit. Hence the argument from the analogy between Jesus and the believer is further strengthened by the observation, that the instrument through whom God effected this in Jesus is already present in the readers. The idea that the Spirit works instrumentally in the resurrection is plainly implied. This is altogether apart from the interesting divergence in the construction of which occurs with the accusative in several important authorities. That would yield the paraphrase: If the Spirit of God who raised Jesus dwells in you, then God will create for that Spirit the same appropriate habitat as He created for Him in the resurrection-body of Jesus. This is a unique idea; it reverses the relation between Spirit and resurrection-body ; usually the Spirit is for the sake of the new body, here the new body would be for the sake of adorning the Spirit. But interesting though the thought may be, the other reading (Sid cum genitivo ) seems to have more textual weight in its favor. Adopting this, we paraphrase: If the Spirit of God who raised Jesus dwells in you, then God will make the indwelling Spirit accomplish for you what He accomplished for Jesus in the latter’s resurrection. The idea of the “indwelling” of the Spirit in believers, occurring as it does in a train of thought prospective to the resurrection, can hardly help suggesting a process of preparation carried on with a view to that supreme eventual crisis. The Spirit is there as indwelling certainly not for assuring the Christian of his ultimate attainment to the resurrection alone. The indwelling must attest itself by activity also. It might be said, however, that in statements of this kind 16 It should be noticed how significantly Paul varies in this connection the name of Christ. First he speaks of the raising of Jesus from the dead. Here the Saviour comes under consideration as to Himself, his own human nature. Then he speaks of the raising of Christ Jesus from the dead. Here the Saviour comes under consideration as the Messiah in his representative capacity, which furnishes a guarantee that his resurrection must repeat itself in that of the others.
[P000031] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 29 the point of departure is the soteriological conception of the Spirit as a present factor in Christian life, and from there it moves forward to the future, so that the eschatological task of the Spirit would not be something peculiar, but only his general task applied to one particular situation. We therefore turn to another train of thought, which clearly starts from the eschatological end of the line, and from that looks backwards into the present life. This is the case in 2 Cor. v. 5 (cp. i. 22; Eph. i. 14). Here Paul derives the proof for God’s having prepared him for the eternal state in a new heavenly body from the fact of God’s having given him the appa(3(bv tov 7TvevfiaTo<:. The “pledge” consists in the Spirit, the genitive being epexegetical, just as in Gal. iii. 14 the i'lrayyeXia tov TrvevfiaTOf means the promised thing consisting in the Spirit.17 Now the Spirit possesses this significance of “pledge” for no other reason than that it constitutes a provisional instalment of what in its fulness will be received hereafter. The quite analogous conception of the cnrapxv tov irvevparos (Rom. viii. 23) proves this. 'Appafiovv means money given in purchases as a pledge that the full amount will be subsequently paid. In this instance, therefore, the Spirit is viewed as pertaining specifically to the future life, nay as constituting the substantial make-up of this life, and the present possession of the Spirit is regarded in the light of an anticipation. The spirit’s proper sphere is the future aeon; from thence He projects Himself into the present, and becomes a prophecy of Himself in his eschatological operations. As indicated above, the Spirit is not only the author of the resurrection-act, but likewise the permanent substratum of the resurrection-life, to which He supplies the inner, basic element and the outer atmosphere. It is this second aspect of his function we must now look into. A difficulty meeting us at 17 In Eph. i. 14, on the other hand, the Spirit is appa/dwv, because He pledges, so that, while the thought is the same, the construction is different; the pledge consists in the Spirit and assures of the inheritance. Similarly, a third conception, that of the cr<£payts (“seal”) lacks the outstanding element in thoappa/dwv, viz. the identity of the pledge and the thing pledged, cp. 2 Cor. i. 22; Eph. i. 13; iv. 30.
[P000032] 30 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW the outset may be briefly referred to. It concerns the two-fold aspect in which the Holy Scriptures present to us the character of the Holy Spirit. Owing to the task He performs in the work of individual salvation, together with the other two members of the Holy Trinity, it is most familiar to us to conceive of Him as a Person, and not only this : the task has become so thoroughly personalized, as to leave almost no room for aught else in our practical contemplation of the Spirit. When, alongside of this, operations and functions are ascribed to Him, for the expression of which we need figures clothed in impersonal terms, we must not over-rashly conclude that in this matter, taken as a whole, two disjointed, differently oriented conceptions of the Spirit confront us, such as it could be absolutely impossible to reduce to common terms. We may not be able to make a construction that shall reconcile what seems to our minds in-combinable in the same subject, but this does not prove that actual coexistence between these two aspects is in the Deity impossible. A Christological parallel can easily disabuse us of the necessity of such a negative conclusion. Nothing can be more personal than the intimate relation which the Christ (particularly the Risen Christ) sustains to the believer. And yet the background or underlying basis of this personal relationship is largely expressed in terms, that, did we not know better, might make us think of an elementally distributed Christatmosphere, in which, at least from the Saviour’s side the personal is submerged, and of which the imagination fails to supply us with an adequate idea of what it consists in, inwardly considered. If to be “in Christ,” and at the same time to live in conscious intercourse and fellowship with Him are not logically identical, and are yet to our common Christian faith joined in the same believing subject without endangering the recognition of the one aspect by that of the other, then why should an analogous double relation of the Holy Spirit to our persons be deemed incongruous? This parallel between the two cases, that of Christ and of the Holy Spirit is all the more convincing, since in the Pauline soteriol-
[P000033] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 31 ogy the two phrases eV Trvevpan and iv XPL<T T V, at least so far as the latter is not meant forensically, are equivalent as to purport. The Holy Spirit is, comparatively speaking, even more elemental than the Risen Christ. Still less is there need for wondering that the Spirit plays in Eschatology this, as it were, semi-personal role. Let us now briefly survey the evidence found for this representation in the Epistles. 1 Cor. xv. 42-50 contrasts the two bodies that belong to the preeschatological and the eschatological states successively. The former is characterized as yjrvxMov, the latter as irvev/taTiicdv . This adjective Pneumatikon expresses the quality of the body in the eschatological state. Every thought of immaterialness, or etherealness or absence of physical denseness ought to be kept carefully removed from the term. Whatever in regard to such qualifications may or may not be implied; it is certain that such traits, if existing, are not described here by the adjective in question. In order to keep far such misunderstandings the capitalizing of the word ought to have been carefully guarded both in translation and otherwise: 'rrvevp.ariKov almost certainly leads on the wrong track, whereas Tlvevp,aTiic6v f not only sounds a note of warning, but in addition points in the right direction positively. Paul means to characterize the resurrection-state as the state in which the Pneuma rules. That it rules signifies more particularly, that it impresses upon the body its three-fold characteristic of acpdapaia, 80'ga and Svpa/iK (vss. 42, 43). Over against this stands the psychical body, which in order of time precedes the soma pneumatikon. The former for its part is characterized by <f>6opa, art/M'a and acrdeveia. The passage is unique even in the long register of the high mysteries of the faith with Paul, in that it contrasts not the body affected by sin, not the body as it came to exist as a result of the entrance of evil into the world with the future body, but the primordial body of Adam (“the First Adam”) and the body of the consummation. The proximate reference is to the contrast between the two bodies only; but in vs. 46 the representation widens out to a far more
[P000034] 32 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW general, indeed a cosmical one. In the all-comprehensive antithesis there established by the principle: “that is not first which is to TrvevfiaTiicov, but that is first which isro yfrvxcKov, then that which is to TrvevfiaTiKov”, this is expressed by the contrast e* 7V* and e’f ovpavov. When it is affirmed that the Second Man is from heaven, this has nothing to do with the original provenience of Christ from heaven; the “from heaven” does not necessarily imply a “coming from heaven,” any more than the opposite “from earth” implies a coming of Adam from the earth at the first creation. 18 To refer “from heaven” to the coming of Christ out of the state of preexistence at his incarnation would make Paul contradict himself, for it would reverse the order insisted upon in vs. 46: not the “pneumatic” is first, but the “psychical.” Besides this it would make the pneumatic the constituent principle of the human nature in Christ before the resurrection, of which there is no trace elsewhere with Paul. The phrase “from heaven” simply expresses that Christ after a supernatural fashion became the Second Man at the point marked by erreiTa. A “becoming” is affirmed of both Adams, the second as well as the first, for the verb iyevero in vs. 45 belongs to both clauses. How far in either case the subject of which 18 Cp. for this use of e£ ovpavov 2 Cor. v. 2, “our habitation which is from heaven”; likewise Mk. viii. II ; xi. 30; Jno. iii. 27; vi. 31; Apoc. xxi. 2. The test of this interpretation of the phrase lies in the use of €7rovpavlos in vss. 48, 49; this adjective is applied to believers no less than to Christ, and in the case of believers it can not mean that they are at the time of writing “from heaven” or “in heaven.” The absence of the word aapuLKos from 1 Cor. xv. 45-49 affords in itself the strongest conceivable proof that the contrast is between the creation-body and the resurrection-body, not between the body invaded by sin and the body restored by redemption. The partial transformation is, of course, included in the larger one. It is like a transaction, if such a one there could be in the sphere of therapy, wherein the physician, while administering medicine for healing, should mix with it an elixir of eternal life. The patient at the end of the treatment would then find himself, not merely healed, but a new man, not figuratively as we sometimes say after a complete recovery, but in the literal sense of the phrase. This, apart from its philosophical background, is the element of truth in the*<£appa*ov a0ava- <rtas of the Greek Fathers.
[P000035] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 33 this is affirmed existed before in a different condition is not reflected upon. The whole tenor of the argument ( for such it actually is) compels us to think of the resurrection as the moment at which to irvevixaTiKov entered. Christ appeared then and there in the form of a 7rvevp.aTi.K6u and as such inaugurated the eschatological era. But, besides identifying the eschatological and the pneumatic, our passage is peculiar in that it most closely identifies the Spirit with Christ. Up to this point the Spirit, who works and sustains the future life was the Spirit of God. Here it begins to be, not so much the Spirit of Christ, but the Spirit which Christ became. And, being thus closely and subjectively identified with the Risen Christ, the Spirit imparts to Christ the life-giving power which is peculiarly the Spirit’s own: the Second Adam became not only 7rvevpa but irvevpa £coottolovv . This is of great importance for determining the relation to eschatology of the Christ-worked life in believers. 19 19 The question why Paul, after having up to vs. 43 (inch) conducted his whole argument on the basis of a comparison between the body of sin and the body of the resurrection, substitutes from vs. 44 on for the body of sin the normal body of creation is an interesting one, though very difficult to answer. The answer should not be sought in the direction of ascribing to him the view that the creation-body and the body of sin are qualitatively identical, in other words that the evil predicates of <j>9opd, ari/zia, a<70ev£ia, enumerated in vs. 42 belong to the body in virtue of creation. Paul teaches too plainly elsewhere that these things came into the world through sin. The proper solution seems to be as follows : the Apostle was intent upon showing that in the plan of God from the outset provision was made for a higher kind of body (as pertaining to a higher state of existence generally). From the abnormal body of sin no inference could be drawn as to that effect. The abnormal and the eschatological are not so logically correlated that the one can be postulated from the other. But the world of creation and the world to come are thus correlated, the one pointing forward to the other ; on the principle of typology the first Adam prefigures the last Adam, the psychical body the pneumatic body (cp. Rom. v. 14). The statement of vs. 44b is not meant as an apodictic assertion, but as an argument: if there exists one kind of body, there exists the other kind also. This explains why the quotation (Gen. ii. 7), which relates proximately to the psychical state only, is yet treated by Paul as proving both, and as therefore warranting the subjoined proposition: “the last Adam became a life-giving Spirit.” The quotation proves this, because the “psychical” as such is typical of the
[P000036] 34 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW We have found that the Spirit is both the instrumental cause of the resurrection-act and the permanent substratum of the resurrection-life. The question here arises which of the two is the primary idea, either in order of thought or in point of chronological emergence. It might seem plausible to put the pneuma-provenience of the resurrection-act first, and to explain this feature from what the Old Testament teaches concerning the Spirit of God as the source of natural life in the world and in man, especially since in the allegory of Ezek. xxxvii this had already been applied to the national resurrection of Israel. If the Spirit worked physical life in its present form, what was more reasonable than to assume that He would likewise be the author of physical life restored in the resurrection. As a matter of fact, however, we find that the operation of the Spirit in connection with the natural world recedes into the background already in the inter-canonical literature, and remains so even in the New Testament writings themselves. It is more plausible to assume that the thought of the resurrection-life was the first in order, and that, in partial dependence on this at least, the idea emerges of the Spirit as the Author of the miracle of the resurrection. For the pneumatic character of the age to come there existed a solid Old Testament basis in trains of thought, which had fully held their own and even found richer development in the early New Testament period. And, quite apart from eschatopneumatic, the first creation of the second, the world that now is (if conceived without sin) of the aeon to come. This exegesis also disposes of the view that Paul meant to include vs. 45° in the quotation, the latter being taken from Gen. i. 27 (man’s creation in the image of God). On such a supposition Paul’s manner of handling the record would have to rest on the Philonic (and older) speculation of a two-fold creation, first of the ideal, then of the empirical man. According to this speculation the ideal man is created first, the empirical man afterwards, since Gen. i comes before Gen. ii. But Paul affirms the very opposite: not the pneumatic is first, the psychical is first. If there is reference at all in vs. 46 to this Philonic philosophoumenon, it must be by way of pointed correction. Paul would mean to substitute for the sequence of the idealistic philosophy the sequence of historic unfolding; the categories of his thought are Jewish, not Hellenic: he reasons in forms of time, not of space.
[P000037] PAULINE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 35 logical contexts, the thought that the heavenly world is the pneumatic world meets us in Paul. Thus i Cor. x. 3, 4 ; Eph. i. 3. From this the transition is not difficult to the idea that the eschatological state is preeminently a pneumatic state, since the highest form of life known, that of the world of heaven, must impart to it its special character. A second problem on which the eschatological evaluation of the Spirit may perhaps be expected to throw some light concerns the ubiquitousness of the Spirit in the entire Christian life on earth, his equal distribution over all its spheres and activities. In Paul first from the subjective side Christianity and the possession of and action through the Pneuma become interchangeable, and with strong emphasis the center of the Spirit’s operations is found in the ethico-religious sphere. With such thoroughness and emphasis this had not been done before Paul. Gunkel has no doubt exaggerated somewhat the originality of the Apostle in this respect and underrated the preparation made for this development by the Old Testament prophetic and earlier New Testament teaching. Still a simple comparison between the Petrine speeches in Acts and the Pauline statements abundantly shows, that Paul was the first to ascribe to the Spirit that dominating place and that pervasive uniform activity, which secure to Him, alongside of the Father and the Son, a necessary divine relation to the Christian state at every point. Princeton. Geerhardus Vos.
[P000038] THE TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT In an article published recently in this Review I endeavored to show that the books enumerated in the Westminster Confession of Faith are those acknowledged by all the Churches of God always and everywhere and approved by Christ and the apostles as well as by the Jewish Church as “the infallible rule of faith and life.” In the present article I am going to advance further in the discussion of the infallibility of the books of the Old Testament by presenting some of the grounds for believing that the Hebrew Scriptures have, as a matter of fact and evidence, been handed down from the time when they were written in a substantially correct form. After a short Preface, I shall take up in order the Manuscripts, the Parallel Passages, the Versions, and especially the Greek Version of the Seventy, leaving other topics for future consideration. I. Preface Before entering upon the consideration of the text of the Old Testament, it may be well to remark that there is no doubt that systems of writing were in current use from the Black Sea to Ethiopia and from Susa to the Nile, for many centuries before the time of Moses; and that the Hebrew language was the common one in Palestine and known in Egypt, also, before the time when the books of Moses were written. The literary forms, both of prose and poetry, in which the Pentateuch is written were also used in Egypt, or Babylon, at a time antecedent to the composition of the works attributed to Moses. Further, the grammar of the Hebrew language is shown by the Hebrew words found in the inscriptions of Thothmes III and in the El-Amarna Letters to have been, by and large, the same as that found in the documents of the Pentateuch. In the second place, it may be remarked that the literary documents of the Egyptians were written ordinarily on stone,
[P000039] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 37 papyrus, leather, linen, wood, gold, silver and copper; and those of the Babylonians on stone, and on clay tablets and cylinders, while those from the ancient Phenician, Moabites and others that remain are commonly on stone. The Harris MS. is an original document written on papyrus. It is 133 feet long and contains columns usually of twelve or thirteen lines each. The translation of the papyrus into English with the notes occupies 120 pages in Breasted’s Egypt (large octavo), the contents being about half as great as those of the Pentateuch. The Annals of Thothmes III on the walls of the great temple at Karnak contain 223 lines. They describe the Asiatic campaigns of Thothmes III and show that “at least in this reign [several hundred years before Moses] careful, systematic records were made and preserved in the royal archives.” The Cylinder A inscription of Gudea, patesi of Lagash about 3000 b.c., is translated by Thureau-Dangin in 34 pages of 38 lines each. The Gilgamish legend which contains the Babylonian account of the Deluge consists of about 3000 lines, on twelve clay tablets, making about as long a work as the book of Genesis. The first Babylonian creation story, so called, is about one-fourth as long. The Birth Omens from the time of Hammurabi and Abraham contain books, divided into chapters and with verses numbered, treating of the laws concerning the interpretation of births. The Laws of Hammurabi give a code of civil and criminal law. We have, also, many triumphal, historical, and other inscriptions covering the whole period in which the Old Testament was written, many of them of the length of an Old Testament book. These various inscriptions and papyri, which have come down to us, show conclusively that the nations around Israel composed numerous literary works of every description. Many of these works have doubtless perished, especially those that were written on papyrus, clay, and other perishable materials. The great question for the scribes of those days was to find out a way by which they could transmit their less ephemeral productions to posterity. This they attempted to do by having treasuries, or libraries, in which contracts and
[P000040] 38 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW documents were preserved, and by having regularly organized bodies of scribes and copyists and proof-readers. By means of these, they were able to transmit information for hundreds and even thousands of years without any material change in the copy, except such changes as were deliberately inserted into the original text, either as explanatory notes, or for further information. In later times, or because they were meant for a population speaking two or more languages, the scribes began to write their documents in two or more languages and scripts. Thus, it is clear, that in those ancient times, long works were written and have come down to us. But, it might be objected to the above paragraph, that the documents on stone and many of those on clay may be original and hence that they afford no real parallel to the Hebrew Scriptures which are all admittedly copies far removed from the original copies. This objection is met, when we observe that the so-called Book of the Dead has, as a matter of fact, been preserved for us in numerous copies of an original going back at least to the 4th Dynasty. Five recensions of this book, or parts of it, have been published. These all go back to a common original ; but no one of them is a copy from any one of the other four, seeing that each was buried with the mummy around which it was wrapped. Yet, in Chapter XXX. B of this book, some lines are exactly the same, though the first copy dates from the fourth or fifth millennium b.c. and the last from the time of the Ptolemies. Among the Babylonian records, also, we find a copy of a temen, a foundation inscription, of Nabunaid which is given in substantially the same form by Assurpanipal, Burnaburiash and Hammurabi, that is, in round numbers at 550, 650, 1500 and 2000 B.c. Now, among those old Egyptian, Assyrian and Babylonian documents, we find many duplicate copies of the same documents ; and these duplicates show the same kinds of variations that we find in the Hebrew manuscripts. Yet, these variations do not invalidate the contracts, nor affect the general trustworthiness of the laws, nor of the historic statements made in the records. Many of these duplicates were written by the
[P000041] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 39 same scribe, or under the direction of the same authority and supervision; and still, they have such variations as did not affect the purpose of the document. For example, in the three lists of the names of the cities conquered in Palestine and Syria by Thothmes III, there are about 40 variations in the writing of 119 names. In the first of the Lamentations given by Langdon in his Sumerian and Babylonian Hymns, there are more than 40 variations in the copies of 3 lines of Sumerian text. In the 14 duplicate contract tablets in Strassmeier’s inscriptions of Nebuchadnezzar, No. 70 has 18 variations in 16 lines ; No. 33, seven in 15 lines. Most of the others agree exactly. In the historical inscriptions of Sennacherib, Esarhaddon and Assurbanipal, there are hundreds of variations and especially many noteworthy additions and omissions in the parallel passages. From this evidence and from that given above, it is certain ; first, that the sources of the Old Testament history may have been written from the time of Abraham down ; secondly, that these sources may have been handed down with sufficient accuracy to insure their trustworthy character; thirdly, that additions in the way of notes and explanations may have been inserted in contemporaneous documents or in copies of the same; fourthly, that duplicates may be exactly the same or may vary more or less, without invalidating their testimony or trustworthiness ; fifthly, that original documents with contemporaneous versions exist from before Abraham down; sixthly, that versions and duplicates whether contemporaneous or not, have often been enlarged or abridged intentionally and that hence it is frequently impossible to argue from the copy or version as to what exactly the original may have been ; and lastly, that all duplicates and versions give substantially the statements and doctrines of the original. Another and most important piece of evidence is to be gathered from the proper names to be found in the Old Testament text and, also, in the records of the nations surrounding Israel. When we observe that in general the names of countries, nations, rivers, cities, kings, and gods are spelled in the
[P000042] 40 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW same way in the contemporary documents of other nations than Israel, as they are spelled in the Biblical records, as they have been handed down to us by the copyists for from 2000 to 3500 years, we cannot but be filled with amazement and a high degree of admiration at the accuracy with which the scribes have performed their arduous work through a succession of scores of generations of erring men. Such accuracy involves the assurance that the scribes did their work honestly, with a high sense of their responsibility to God and with a determination in every case to copy correctly what was set before them. II. The Manuscripts The most noticeable feature in the Manuscripts is the variation in the writing of vowels fully or defectively, i.e., 0 and u with the use of w (waw ) and e and i with the use of y (yodh). According to Ginsburg, Jehudah Chayug, who flourished in the early part of the eleventh century a.d., and who is known as the founder of Hebrew grammar, states that the use of these vowel letters had been “left to the discretion of the scribes and that this practice still obtained in his days.” In fact, this double way of writing the long vowels is to be found in the earliest of the inscriptions written in the Hebrew alphabet; and also, in all the Hebrew manuscripts from the earliest to the latest. Thus in the first chapter of Daniel there are 46 variants from the Textus Receptus in the use of the vowel letters w and y. These variations occur in from 1 to 16 different MSS. and make all told 288 times in which these 46 variants are found in the 178 MSS. in which they occur. These variants do not affect in the slightest the sound, form or meaning of the words in which they occur any more than the sound, form and meaning of honor differs from that of honour. It is altogether a matter of spelling. There are about 1,250,000 letters in the 1390 pages of the Hebrew Bible and about 284,000,000 in the MSS. described in Kennicott. In all of the manuscripts collated by Kennicott and his helpers there are about 900,000 variants,
[P000043] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 41 of which about 750,000 are changes of w and y. That is, there is about one variant for every 316 letters, and one variant other than that of w and y for about every 1580 letters. These variants include insertions and omissions, transpositions, changes of consonants and variations of words. It is manifest, therefore, that we can look for little help from the Hebrew manuscripts in changing to a more original form the Hebrew text of the Old Testament; especially in view of the fact that most of these variations are to be found in only one, or at best, a very few of the manuscripts collated in every instance by Kennicott and his colleagues. The following table based on the variations, others than w and y, in the first chapter of Amos will give a good illustration of the comparatively slight value of the variations as evidence against the Textus Receptus. These variations are drawn from 337 manuscripts and are 42 in number, occurring all told 54 times. Of the 42 cases, 38 occur in only 1 MS., one in only 2 ; one in 4, one in 5 and one in 7. 1. Variations of Single Letters. 3= 3, vs. 1 1 in i MS. and vs. 14 in 1 MS. 3= S, vs. 8 in 1 MS. 3= 0, vs. 3 in 1 MS. 3 + , vs. 3 in 1 MS. 3= 3, vs. 1 in 2 MSS. 3 T , vs. 9 in 1 MS. 3= 3, vs. 14 in 1 MS. n +, vs. 4 in 5 MSS. n=\ vs. 6 in 1 MS. '=n, vs. 9 in 1 MS. n=n, vs. 13 in 1 MS. and vs. 14 in 1 MS. 3— , vs. 9 in 1 MS. 3= 0, vs. 11 in 1 MS. V— , vs. 8 in 1 MS. n— , vs. 10 in 1 MS. 2. Variation of Words. Addition of words: the sign of the definite direct object ( fix ) is added in vs. 10 in 7 MSS.; “Jotham” in vs. 1 in 1
[P000044] 42 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW MS.; vs. 7 in i MS.; the preposition b in vs. n in i MS. Omission of words: in vs. 6 in i MS.; vs. 7 in i MS.; vs. 8 two words, each in 1 MS.; vss. ir, 13, 15, one each in I MS. Transposition : of words, in verse 5 in 1 MS. ; of letters, in verses 5 and 13, each in 1 MS. Repetitions, only case in vs. 13 in 1 MS. Change into a synonym vs. 6 in 1 MS., in vs. 13 and vs. 14, in two cases each in 1 MS. Change of suffix one in 1 MS. in vs. 8. Change in written name of God in vs. 8 in 1 MS. Unclassified changes in vs. 4 one in 4 MSS. ; in vs. 13 one in 1 MS. ; and in vs. 14 one in 1 MS. Before passing on to the next kind of evidence, it may be well to mention a few of the more remarkable things found in the text of the manuscripts. And first, let us look at the abbreviations. We find in some MSS. (e.g., Kenn. 5, 9, 76) that '“itS” is used for Israel; that in No. 9 occurs for the first person singular of the perfect, the sufformative being omitted ; that the sign of the masculine plural of the absolute state is sometimes omitted in Nos. 9, 76 and 155; that in Nos. 9 and 76, the suffix is omitted; and that the last letters are at times absent in Nos. 9, 34, 76, 89 and 155. Also, the Tetragrammaton is denoted at times in Nos. 9, 34, 35, 36, 37 and 76 by two or three yodhs; and a frequent substitution of one designation for God for another occurs in the MSS. Thus, for example, in Ps. ii. 4, Jehovah is found in 64 MSS. instead of the Adonai of the Textus Receptus; in Ps. iii. 2, Elohim is found for Jehovah in No. 2 ; in Ps. iv. Jehovah is found for Elohay in No. 40. Further, designations for God are frequently omitted or inserted as in Ps. ii. 9 (5 MSS.), v. 2, 13, vii. 2, 7. Lastly, transposition of letters, words and clauses average about one for every 52 pages; and additions and omissions, one for every 5 pages. III. Parallel Passages About one-fifth of the Old Testament is to be found in duplicate or parallel passages. The variations in these parallels are not merely of value in themselves, but also in the light
[P000045] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 43 which they shed upon the history of the text. The most lengthy and important of these parallels consists of the books of Chronicles from Chapter x of the first book on to the end of the second, except most of n chapters of Book i and io of Book 2 and parts of fourteen other chapters. Before entering upon the discussion of the parallels in Samuel-Kings on the one hand and of Chronicles on the other, let us call attention to the fact that the critics of all schools admit that the sources of Samuel-Kings are substantially reliable. As Cornill says: “As was the case in all civilised states of the ancient East, in Israel also, from the beginning of the monarchy onwards, official annals will have been kept, in which the achievements of the kings and personal details about them were described.” Besides these annals we have “a collection of Ephraimitic accounts,” “a number of detailed Judaean histories,” and “a Temple-history.” These sources, collections of psalms, proverbs, prophecies, and other works recording the history up to the end of Zedekiah’s reign, must have been preserved, as indeed were J and E and D, Hosea, Amos, Isaiah i-xxxix and other works, through the destruction of Jerusalem. The writer of Kings, therefore, must have had in his possession the sources which he used in the composition of his book. There is no reason known why the writer of the books of Chronicles may not, also, have had access not merely to our books of Kings, but even to the sources of these books as well as to many other sources which the author of Kings did not use. In fact, the writer of Chronicles declares that he had access to such sources. Thus, in i Chr. xxvii. 24, he speaks of “the numbering in the numbering of the deeds of the days of king David” and in xxiii. 27 of “the last words (or deeds) of David” ; in 2 Chr. xvi. 1 1, xxv. 26, xxviii. 26, we read of “the book of the kings of Judah and Israel” and in xxxii. 32 “of a vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amos in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.” In 2 Chr. xxvii. 7, xxxv. 27 and xxxvi. 8 and 1 Chr. ix. 1 we have mention of “the book of the kings of Israel and Judah,” perhaps the same as the last. In the case
[P000046] 44 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW of Manasseh (xxxiii. 18) we have reference to a record called the “deeds of the kings of Israel” and in the case of Joash (xxiv. 27) to another called “the Midrash of the book of the kings.” Special works by prophets are also cited. Thus, in addition to the prophets mentioned in Kings, we have “the visions of Iddo the seer” (2 Chr. ix. 29), and “the Midrash of the prophet Iddo” (2 Chr. xiii. 22), “the words of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is mentioned in the book of the Kings of Israel” (2 Chr. xx. 34), “the words of Uzziah first and last (which) Isaiah, the son of Amos wrote” (2 Chr. xxvi. 22), “the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amos” (2 Chr. xxxii. 32), and (probably) “the sayings of the seers” (2 Chr. xxxiii. 19). Now, it has been the custom of the radical critics of Chronicles for a hundred years or so, to decry these references of the writers of Chronicles, without having any objective ground for their procedure except their desire to show the unhistorical character of the books, even to the extent of assuming that the author manufactured the references and the titles of the documents to which he referred. For notice, there is a universal admission that the sources of many of the books of the Old Testament have come down from David and Solomon and that the sources of others passed safely through the cataclysm of the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. The book of Kings is a book admitted to have been composed from sources, most of which (except the last few verses, which refer to events immediately following the fall of Jerusalem and to the enfranchisement of king Jehoiachim about 560 B.c.) must have been written before the capture of the royal city. Since, then, these sources of Kings existed at 560 b.c., having survived all the vicissitudes of the sack of the city, what reason is there for supposing that they and others like them were not still in existence in the time of Ezra as the book of Chronicles implies? What purpose can the writer have had in appealing to documents which had never been written, or were not known to his readers? For thousands of years writings in both Egypt and Babylon with
[P000047] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 45 well-known titles had been cited and copied. Books such as the books of Jashar and the Book of the Wars of Jehovah and the Laws of Jehovah are cited in the earliest of our present books. What evidence has any one to show that the documents from which the Chronicler’s citations were made did not exist ? But, it is said, that about half of our books of Chronicles was evidently taken over bodily from our present books of Samuel and Kings, and that the numerous variations in the text of the former militate against its historicity. Let us, then, next examine into the character and number of these variations to see if the variations cannot be otherwise accounted for. 1. First, then, we find that there is scarcely a verse in Chronicles that is exactly like its parallel verse in Samuel or Kings. If Chronicles were copied from the latter, it is contrary at least to the analogy of other ancient documents to have so few accurate copies. 2. Secondly, many of the variations are simply a difference in the pointing of the consonantal text, such as the frequently cited writing of the name David, i.e., with the i written “fully” in Chronicles but “defectively” in Samuel. As we have shown above, this difference is due entirely to the idiosyncrasy of the scribes, or exegetes, and is never to be used as evidence of the original text, or to determine the date of a document. The same is true in general of the employment of vowel letters, especially when final. 3. Thirdly, such variations as are found, for example, in the writing of the pronoun “I” (the using of for 'DJN)? while they might be an indication of a later date for Chronicles, are anything but an evidence of the copying of Kings by Chronicles. Why could they not both have come from the same original source? The same question may be asked concerning such variations as “ships going to Tarshish” for “a ship of Tarshish.” 4. But the strongest arguments in the text against the copying of Samuel-Kings by the author of Chronicles are to
[P000048] 46 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW be found (a) in the large number of differences in the verbs and prepositions used in the parallel passages and (b) in the kind and length of the insertions and omissions. a. I have counted ioo verbs in Samuel-Kings for which a different word occurs in Chronicles, making 200 verbs in all. Of these 97 per cent occur in both Samuel-Kings and Chronicles, so that it is not in accordance with the facts to say that the change is due to a change in the language between 550 b.c. (when Kings was written) and the time when Chronicles was composed. Nor will it do to say that the Chronicler wilfully changed so many verbs without any assignable reason. This would be contrary to all analogy among ancient copyists. What, then, will account for it? I can conjecture no reason sufficient to meet the case, except to suppose that the royal records of the Hebrews before the captivity were written in some system of cuneiform. About 180 Hebrew words appear in the Amarna Letters which are written in cuneiform; and documents in cuneiform (but in the Babylonian language) were written in Gezer, twenty miles only from Jerusalem, as late as the middle of the seventh century b.c. If the royal records of the Hebrews were written in cuneiform script, and in the Hebrew language it would, it seems to me, account for all the variations in the verbs ; for a single sign might be used not merely for synonyms, but for two, or even more, sets of synonyms. The use of cuneiform in the writing of the original royal records would account, also, for the scores of differences in the prepositions employed in the parallel passages. For, many cuneiform signs denote two or more prepositions. b. Additions and omissions of single words and additions of comments or explanations are liable to be found in any ancient copy of a document, whether the copy was made on the same day the original was written, or centuries after. The kind and length of additions made by the Chronicler would point to original sources used by both the author of Kings and the author of Chronicles ; and, in the case of Chronicles at least, to some original sources used by one and not by
[P000049] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 47 the other. There is no reason, nor any proof, to show that the additional remarks, the poems, the statistics, the genealogies and the parts concerning the priestly activities would not, or could not, have been made in the fifth century b.c. as well as in the third. For example, the exaggerations in the numbers which are found in Chronicles may have been made by any scribe at any time. And further, in this connection, it is proper to ask why all of the critics mention the exaggerations of numbers found in Chronicles without stating that the diminutions occur about half as many times. These differences, the lowering as well as in the heightening of the numerical statements, seem to indicate that the variations in Chronicles are due to some other cause than malice aforethought, most probably to a difficulty of reading the numerical notations of the original source. The numerous variations in the numbers found in the Babylonian and Aramaic recensions of the Behistun inscriptions are impossible of explanation, although both recensions were certainly written at about the same time and one was certainly a copy of the other, and probably translated by the same person, or persons, that composed the more original of the two. While the variations are glaring, they are non-essential and do not impair the general agreement of the two recensions. They show doubt as to the number of the enemy taken alive or slain in the battles; but not as to who fought the battles, nor as to where they were fought, nor as to who won the victory. IV. Versions A few years ago, the earliest known version of an ancient document was the Septuagint, made from Hebrew into Greek in the third century b.c., or shortly after. Now, however, we have examples of translations going back long before the time of Hammurabi. Several bilingual interlinear inscriptions from the time of Hammurabi and Samsu-Iluna are known. The original of the fifth Babylonian story of creation, of which we have a copy of a copy of the time of Assurbanipal, may possibly date back to the time of Hammurabi.
[P000050] 48 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW All of these Babylonian and Assyrian translations are good word for word renderings of the original. Many Sumerian hymns having a translation into Babylonian have been published. In addition to these we have, from about 520 b.c. on, recensions of the Behistun inscriptions in four languages in Persian, Susian, Babylonian and Aramaic and smaller Persian inscriptions in these languages, some of which are from Egypt and contain Egyptian instead of Susian (?). From Egypt, we have, from the third century b.c., two long trilingual inscriptions,—the Rosetta Stone and the decree of Canopus, both from the third century b.c., occurring in Egyptian and Greek. These inscriptions teach us that from the earliest historic times, whenever the population of a kingdom was bilingual, or multilingual, the decrees and other important governmental documents were often published in two or more languages. These bilingual documents always contain the same matter in substance; though they sometimes differ considerably in length and in minor details. Thus, to the decree of Canopus the hieroglyphic recension is much longer than the Greek, since the Egyptian scribe has made use of his priestly knowledge to give the particulars of some of the rites, which are mentioned by the Greek writers in only general terms ; and he has given to the king his Egyptian complimentary titles, which are not found in the Greek. He shows the various ranks of the priests and priestesses, and the various degrees of holiness of the temples. So, also, in the four languages of the Behistun inscription, there is a longer recension, written in Persian and Susian, and a shorter in Babylonian and Aramaic. The shorter recension, however, adds frequently a statement of the number of the men killed, or taken alive, in the battles fought. But, however many and various may be the differences between the recensions of the bilingual, trilingual or quadriliteral inscriptions, there is no doubt as to the general agreement of the documents in all substantial or material statements.
[P000051] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 49 In like manner, also, it can be shown that in all important particulars,—in all matters affecting the general history, the Law, the great predictive passages, the doctrines of revelation and redemption,—all the ancient versions of the Old Testament, secondary as well as primary, are substantially agreed. Since the Hebrew was undoubtedly the original (in all but a few chapters of Daniel and Ezra), the Textus Receptus is always to be taken as the starting-point of any investigation of the text of the Old Testament documents. It ought never to be changed when the evidence against it is not conclusive, or merely conjectural. We should always approach the study of any passage with the resolve to find out, if possible, if the apparent variation of the version is a real variation based on a different original ; or if it may be due to the ignorance of the translator, or to his desire to improve, or comment upon, the text he is translating. And, further, we ought to consider whether, or not, the variation arises from a corruption in the text of the version itself, as is frequently apparent in the Syriac Peshitto. V. The Septuagint Version We shall now devote ourselves to a cursory consideration of the light thrown by the ancient versions upon the Hebrew text of the Old Testament from which the versions were made. The most important of these versions is one in Greek called the Septuagint, made in the second and third centuries, b.c. It was made by different translators and at different times, probably over a period of more than one hundred years, beginning probably at about 280 b.c. Some of the books were translated with a high degree of accuracy, whereas others are rendered more or less paraphrastically ; but all give a tolerably fair view of the doctrines and substance of the original. 1. In discussing this version it will be necessary to observe at the outset that there were no vowel signs in the Hebrew text from which the Septuagint was made, nor were there any accentual signs. Both of these systems of signs used in the Hebrew manuscripts were first introduced into the text by
[P000052] 50 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW certain scribes called Massoretes who lived about the year a.d. 500. These signs represented the exegesis of the Rabbis of that time. Whenever, therefore, the Greek translators translate the same consonants as those found in the Hebrew text, but with the use of different vowels from those affixed by the later Hebrew scribes, the Greek translation represents only a different exegesis of the original text. Thus the consonants TJ? in Prov. xii. 19, Amos i. 1 1, Mi. vii. 18 and Zeph. iii. 8 are read ‘ad (ever) by the Massoretes and ‘ed (witness) by the Greek exegetes; in Gen. xlix. 27 ‘ad (prey) and ‘dd (again). In Ps. 1 . 23 the letters rQT are read by the Massoretes as a participle 20beah (sacrificer) and by the Greeks as zebah (sacrifice) . In Ps. xc. 5 the Massoretes read HJty as shendh (sleep) and the Greeks shdndh (year). In Gen. vi. 5 the Hebrew pronounces “IIP as yeser (imagination) and the Greek as ydsar (imagines). There are hundreds of such different readings of the original text ; but they do not affect that text itself but merely the interpretation of it. 2. What we have just said of the vowel signs is true also of the so-called vowel letters. As we have seen under the treatment of the Manuscripts, these vowel letters always have been inserted or admitted ad libitum into the Hebrew manuscripts, whenever there was a suitable long vowel ; and whether there was to be such a vowel was determined by the exegesis rather than vice versa. Many of the so-called variations of the Greek from the Hebrew text, will be found, therefore, to be nothing but a second interpretation of the same original. For example, in Ps. lxv. 10, the Hebrew has read rabbath (very) but the Greek ribbitha (thou didst multiply) ; in Zech. ix. 12 the Hebrew has read shubu (turn) and the Greek sh ebu (sit) —the original text being the same in both cases. 3. The differences to be noticed between the Massoretic Hebrew and that from which the Greek Septuagint was translated, in regard to the division of words, clauses, verses, and so forth, are due, not to variations in the original text, but to different interpretations of the same. Thus kes-ydh (throne of Yah) in Ex. xvii. 16 was read by the Seventy as kasya
[P000053] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 5 I (hidden) \miktam (Ps. xvi. i ) was read mak-tam (tender, perfect) ; ‘olamoth (ages) in LXX of Ps. xlviii. 15 was read by the Massoretes as ‘al-muth (concerning the death) and by Luther as ‘alamoth (youth). Again, in Hos. xii. 1, the first clause ends in Hebrew with “Israel,” and in Greek, with “Judah,” owing to a different exegesis of the verse. So, in Ps. lxviii. 22, the first clause in Hebrew ends with se‘ar “hair,” but in Greek, with “enemies” ; and in vs. 24, with “dogs” and “blood” respectively. In Ps. lxix. 14, the first clause in Hebrew ends with “grace,” but in Greek with “God.” As to verses, Ps. lxv. 1 1 ends in Hebrew with “thou blessest” ; but in Greek, vs. 12 begins with it. Ps. x. 9 ends in Hebrew with “his snare” and vs. 10 in Greek begins with it. Moreover, in Ex. xxxvi-xl, Jer. xxv-li, Prov. xxiv-xxxi and 1 Kings iv. 17- vii. 51, many changes in order of sections, chapters and verses are found, “due to a deliberate rearrangement of the groups.” 4. The apparent variations, which have arisen from the judgment that certain letters are abbreviations rather than formative elements, or suffixes, may be considered as due to the wrong, or variant, interpretation of the same original text. Thus, the Lord in the Greek of Ex. viii. 23 may have arisen from taking the y of yomar (he will say) as an abbreviation for “Yehovah.” So, also, in Lev. vi. 10, the y of ’issay (my offerings made by fire) may have been read as “Yehovah”; and in Is. ii. 11, the y in ‘enay (my eyes) is in Greek “the eyes of the Lord.” In 2 Chr. xxi. 2 Jehoshaphat is called king of “Israel” in the Hebrew and “Judah” in the LXX ; but in I Kings xxii. 41-51, he is in both called king of “Judah.” In 2 Chr. xxviii. 19, the Hebrew text calls Ahaz the “king of Israel,” when the Greek, Latin, Syriac and 10 Heb. MSS. in Kennicott have “king of Judah.” In all of these cases, it seems probable that a yodh only was written in the original text, this being the first letter of both Judah and Israel. It is probable that the ancient Hebrews had an abbreviated system of denoting numerals, such as were used by the Egyptians, Babylonians and other nations living near them. Until
[P000054] 52 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW this system shall have been discovered, it seems useless to attempt to account for the numerous variations in numbers in the versions from the Hebrew text, and also in the parallel passages of the latter. 5. Another source of what has been falsely called mistakes in the text has arisen from the fact that in the writing of the alphabet at about 400 B.C., a letter was frequently written once but read twice. This way of writing is familiar to all who read Syriac, Arabic, Aramaic and Hebrew, especially in the so-called intensive stems. In the Aramaic indorsements of the Babylonian tablets, however, this double reading and single writing of the letters of the alphabet is confirmed by the writing of the cuneiform. In these inscriptions, the letter to be doubled may belong the first time to the first of two words and the next time to the second. Now, if we suppose that the Hebrews and Aramaeans in Egypt wrote in the same way as they did in Babylon (or, at least, that they read in the same way), we can account for the numerous cases in which the Greek translators doubled letters in reading the Hebrew text to be translated. Thus, in Hos. vi. 3 the second n in nakon (is prepared) was doubled by the Greek translators, the second one being read at the head of the next word, making nimsa'u (we will find) ; in 2 Chr. xii. 2 the m in melek (king) was read also at the end of the preceding word, Shishak, making it Sousakeim. 6. In many cases, a translation that was thought to have arisen from the LXX having had before them a text different from our present text is found to have been due to the fact that the translators of the second century b.c. were cognizant of meanings of the Hebrew roots which became lost to future ages even among the Jews themselves. Such cases, again, must be referred to a knowledge of the Hebrew language possessed by the Jews of that time and not to any difference of text. 7. Insertions into, or omissions from, a duplicate, copy, or version, of an original do not imply a mistake in that original. This would seem to be the legitimate expectation of
[P000055] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 53 common sense; but, at any rate, it is the clear teaching of analogy, derived from a study of ancient documents. The numerous duplicates, copies and versions found among the Egyptians or Babylonians, Persians and other ancient nations, present analogies to all the varieties of documents which enter into the consideration of the text of the Old Testament. 8. In many cases, where two words are found in the translation, only one is found in the original, the two being merely an attempt to render the sense of the one. Thus in Prov. i. 3, the LXX insert “true” with “righteousness” ; in i. 10, “men” with “unholy” ; in i. 4, “young” with “lad” ; in i. 7, they translate by “dark saying” ; in i. 9, “golden” with “necklace” ; in i. 11, “man” with “innocent”; in ii. 11, “good” with “counsel” ; in iii. 9, “just” with “labors” ; in iii. 31, “evil” with “man”; in v. 2, “good” with “mind”; in v. 3, “whoring woman” for rnt ; and many more in the same book. 9. In like manner, one word in the version translates two in the original. So, in Prov. x. 13 “heartlessness” for “wanting in heart,” xi. 22, “evil-minded” for “turning away from advice,” vs. 29 “prudent” for “wise of heart” ; and many other cases in the book of Proverbs. 10. The large number of transliterations in the LXX shows us that the translators were frequently not certain in their own minds as to what the original text meant. It makes it probable, also, that in many cases they thought they knew the sense of the original, when they did not. In all such cases this misinterpreting of the sense of the Hebrew text should not lead us to suppose that the translators had before them a different text from that which we have in our present Hebrew Bibles. Thus in 2 Kings xi. 4, the LXX transliterate rasim (runners; Vulg. milites), evidently because they did not understand the meaning of the original; cp. Job. xxxix. 13, ne‘elasa 1 Chr. xv. 20, ‘alamoth, vs. 21, amaseneith, vs. 28, sofer, and xvi. 39, Bama. In 1 Sam. xxi. 8, the Hebrew (A.V., “detained”) is first translated by the LXX and then transliterated, as if they were not quite sure of the meaning.
[P000056] 54 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW 11. It is obvious, that the translation of what the later Rabbis and other exegetes have thought to be proper names comes under the same class. They are due to interpretation and not to a difference of the text. Thus in I Chr. viii. 38, ix. 44, we find “his firstborn” for “Bokru”; in Ezra viii. 18 “Sarabia” is rendered by apxvv v\Q° v ', in Ezra viii. 17, “Chasphia” by “silver”; in Ezra x. 37, “Jaasu” (Vulg., Jasi) is rendered by “they made”; in Ezra iv. 7 “Bishlam” by “in peace.” 1 2. It is a question whether most of the changes arising from the different readings of certain consonantal signs should not be classed under the head of interpretations rather than under that of the reading of a different text. Let me explain and illustrate. The most frequent of all the variations in the reading of consonants are those between w and y and those between r and d. As to w and y, about half of the whole number of the Massoretic notes on the text of the Old Testament Hebrew Bible consist of remarks upon the variations of those two letters ; so that it is certain that the manuscripts on which they based these notes must have varied considerably in regard to these two letters. The reason for this is probably the fact that, about the year one, the two letters were written with a sign much like the figure 1. When the text passed into the new alphabet in which the Bible is now written and printed, much confusion must have prevailed at times as to which letter of the older text was meant. This necessitated an interpretation by the scribes and translators. In the time at which the Greek version was made, however, (i.e. from 100 to 300 b.c.), w was written very much like the top of a shepherd’s crook, or like the figure 4 with the down stroke lengthened, whereas y was like a reversed capital F with a stroke at the bottom running to the left, or like a capital V turned upside down with a small v inserted. Consequently, where a translation in the LXX depends on a reading with w instead of y, or y instead of w, the Greek reading is probably often to be preferred to that of the Hebrew Masso-
[P000057] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 55 retie Text. For example in Zech. xiv. 6 the y at the beginning of each of the last two words was read by the LXX as w, making the meaning of the sentence “there shall be no light but cold ancf frost.” So, in Prov. xvii. 27 the w of the first word in the second clause is changed in the Kri, LXX and Latin into y; in Ps. cxlv. 5 the phrase for “and the words of” is changed into a verb meaning “they shall tell,” by reading with the LXX and Syriac a y instead of a w at the beginning and a w for a y at the end of the first word in the second clause. Further, in 2 Kings xxiv. 1 5 the Kri 'TN is supported by the LXX and Vulg. and is certainly the better reading; and in Ps. xci. 4 the reading ( shall surround) of the LXX and Syriac is probably better than the w ( and buckler) of the Hebrew text. In like manner, also, most of the variations between r and d which are found between the Hebrew text and its versions are doubtless due to the difficulty of determining whether the dubious sign used in the Hebrew alphabet, in use at the time when the version of the LXX was made, was an r or a d. This sign in the alphabet used in Egypt was much like the figure 4; but in almost all the old Semitic alphabets, it was hard to be sure which of the two letters was meant. In the Samaritan alphabet and that of the Mesha inscription they are clearly distinguished, but in the old Hebrew coins, gems and inscriptions, it is often impossible to tell which letter was meant by the writer. Consequently, it seems certain, that most of the variations in these letters between the Hebrew Massoretic text and that represented by the Septuagint Greek version are due to a difference of interpretation of this dubious sign. The Greek version stands for an interpretation made by the translators in the second and third centuries b.c. ; the Massoretic text, and, in general, the later Greek, the Syriac, the Latin and the Aramaic versions, for an interpretation made by the Rabbis who lived in the second, third and fourth centuries a.d. Owing to this ambiguity in the sign itself, the burden falls upon us of attempting to find out which letter was meant by
[P000058] 56 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW the original writer. This burden is generally not as great as it might seem, at first thought, to be ; because the context usually enables us to decide which of the two letters is more probably meant. At the worst, the difficulty is about the same as that which confronts us when we are left to decide how an unpointed consonantal text is to be pointed, or how an imperfect is to be interpreted as to time or mood (i.e., whether as incipient, frequentative, imperative, potential, etc.), or whether a genitive in Greek is subjective or objective. To illustrate, the verb ’amar “to say” and its derivatives occur over 5000 times. In all of these cases the sign is always read in the LXX as r. Dor (generation) occurs about 120 times and is always read in the same way. On the other hand, we have about 250 instances from about 100 different roots where they have been read in different ways by the Septuagint translation and the Jews who gave us the Massoretic text. Several of the most interesting of these are the following : In Gen. i. 2, the Hebrew has the verb rdhaf (to brood) ; while the Greek reads daliaf (to rush, or blow). Here the Greek agrees with the Samaritan Aramaic, the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan and with Jerome. In Gen. ii. 2 the Hebrew reads bard (create), whereas the Greek has read bdda (to begin) . In Zech. xii. 10, the Hebrew has dakar (to pierce) and the LXX has probably read rakad (to insult). Another series of variations, probably due to different interpretations of the same original text, is to be found in the not infrequent change of person, gender, and number that meets us, here and there, in the present Hebrew text. When the verb is concerned in these changes, they are frequently accompanied by a change of suffix. How explain these variations as interpretations? Very few of them can have been occasioned by the common mistakes arising from misreading of the original. They can be explained, however, if we suppose that the original documents were written with an abbreviated form of the verb called infinitive absolute, to which were later added the preformative and sufformative denoting
[P000059] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 57 person, gender and number. The same would apply also to the suffixes for the objective pronoun. It is certain that both the Egyptians and Babylonians could, and often did, use the sign, or signs, denoting the root idea, without adding the signs for persons, gender, number, or object. So, also, the Hebrew writers frequently used the so-called infinitive absolute without any performative, or sufformative, to denote person, gender, or number. They frequently omitted, also, the objective pronouns after any form of the verb and, especially, after the infinitive absolute. It is obvious that, in such cases, it is left to the reader to supply the person, gender, number and object. Variations in these particulars would arise, therefore, from the different interpretations of the exegetes of the passages in which the variations occur and not necessarily from a difference of text. All mistakes in such passages will be due, also, to the interpretation of the text and must be corrected by going back, when possible, to the original text from which the interpretations were derived. As far as the objective pronouns are concerned, it is possible, also, that the ancient Hebrew had a sign denoting something like “put in your objective pronoun here.” Such signs are to be found in Babylonian. Aside from the common use of the infinitive absolute to strengthen the root of the verb, as in moth tamuth (thou shalt surely die, Gen. ii. 17), it is used about 300 times in the Old Testament in place of the finite forms with preformative or sufformative, or in place of the imperative, construct infinitive, or participles. That is, the naked form of the root is used for any person, gender or number of the finite verb whether perfect or imperfect and also instead of the construct infinitive, the participle, or the imperative. The languages of the versions, such as Greek and Latin, render this infinitive absolute by any mood or tense they deem best. For example, the LXX have the present in Deut. xxvii. 1, Jer. vii. 9, Is. lix. 4, 2 Sam. xxiv. 12 et al the future in 2 Kings iv. 43, Joel ii. 26, Ezek. xxiii. 47, Num. xxiii. 20; theaoristin 1 Sam. ii. 28, Is. lix. 13, Ps. xxxv. 16, Ex. xxxvi. 7 et al] the imperfect in Ps. cxxvi. 6, 2 Sam. xvi. 13, Jer. iii. 1,
[P000060] 58 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW Ezek. i. 14; and even of the Greek perfect, as in Nah. ii. 10. Also, by the first person singular, as in Deut. ix. 21, Jer. xxxii. 33 ; and by the 1st plural, as in Is. lix. 13, Dan. ix. 5 ; by the second person singular, as in Lev. xxv. 14, Is. lviii. 6, and plural, as in Jer. vii. 9, Jud. vii. 19; by third person singular, as in Hos. x. 4, Num. xxx. 3 and plural in Ezek. i. 14, Jer. xiii. 16. The giving of further examples would too much enlarge this article. Enough have been given to show that many of the variations of the verbs in the parallel passages of the Old Testament may be due to the fact that in the original text the verb was written, in many more cases than in our present textus receptus, in the infinite absolute; and that the later scribes and copyists, and translators, having interpreted these infinitives in different ways, wrote them out in full as they now appear in the manuscripts and printed editions. Thus, in the parallel passages we have HID'' in 2 Sam. vi. 9 and N’ON in 1 Chr. xiii. 12 ; Tin in 2 Sam. vii. 1 1 and TJK in 1 Chr. xvii. 10; DDBpn in 2 Kings xi. 8 and IB'pPl in 1 Chr. xviii. 8, et al. This would account, also, for many of the variations of the Massoretic notes such as“lB‘N*l(2 Sam. i. 8) forlStOlSNIpn for Kip'* (2 Sam. xii. 24); for 12}? (Is. xxviii. 15). Likewise the variations of the verb in the Septuagint would thus be accounted for. For example, Hos. ii. 4, iv. 5, 15, x. 15, xi. 10, Pss. x. 13, xxviii. 5, xviii. 29, 41. This view is confirmed by the fact that the later versions generally agree with the later Hebrew text as interpreted by the Massoretes. Thus, the Latin version of Jerome nearly always agrees with the Massoretic notes and the Hebrew text, as in the examples from Samuel and Hosea just given above. The Syriac Peshitto and the Targum, also, generally agree with the Massoretic interpretation and were almost certainly made from the same Hebrew text which we now have. In concluding this section of my discussion, let me say, that I think that I have at least opened up to further research a wide field for those who want to get at the original text of the Old Testament, as it came forth from the pens of those
[P000061] TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 59 who wrote the books. I think, also, that I have shown that a large part of the variations in the Old Testament text, which have hitherto been called mistakes, are to be explained as debatable interpretations of that text. Such variations and interpretations do not really affect the historicity and inspiration of the original text; but simply its correct transmission and this only in respect to matters of minor importance. Princeton. R. D. Wilson.
[P000062] THE RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED Those who claim to be scientifically minded talk with smiling impatience of evangelical Christianity and of its “prescientific” ideas; and it is impossible to deny that many of these ideas do seem incompatible and irreconcilable with much that the modern searcher after wisdom takes for fact. Evangelical Christianity believes in the supernatural, the miraculous, and the teleological ; but the scientifically minded assure us that modern science cannot admit these categories into the circle of its regulative principles. Evangelical Christianity holds that the world exists for the sake of the chosen of God, and that these exist in turn for the glory of God ; but to the scientifically minded these are outworn and otiose ideas. All that man knows in this world and all that he needs to know in order to accomplish his destiny, says evangelical Christianity, has been specially and divinely revealed, and therefore there is no place for fresh discoveries of this matter, nor for addition nor subtraction. But scientific mindedness cannot admit any such final and perfect and authoritative disclosure of a divine will, nor can it yield to any power save that of sufficient reason. The evangelical Christian walks by faith in God, and follows the admirable exhortation of St. Augustine : Intellege ut credos, crede ut intellegas—he knows that he may believe, and he believes that he may reach larger knowledge. For evangelical Christianity worship is adoration of the Triune God, and as mental submission to His gracious will, is a most delightful exercise ; but how many times do the scientifically minded assure us that the newer knowledge refutes the evangelical concept of God, and makes the evangelical way of approach to Him impossible. Similarly with regard to prayer. James Montgomery wrote : Prayer is the Christian’s vital breath, The Christian’s native air, but the scientifically minded tell us that they cannot believe in prayer as petition—“begging,” a contemporary writer calls
[P000063] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 6l it, or part of the “grab-bag” view of religion—nor can he see any benefit in it beyond what may be explained as doubtful advantages due to emotional credulity and auto-suggestion. That this conflict of ideals is not new is evident when we turn from present circumstances to past history. Those who relate the story of science remind us of the two-fold revolution in ideas brought about by Copernicus and Darwin respectively, and that in each case the Church was on the wrong side. The Roman Church was clearly so. Melchior Inchofer of the Jesuits denounced the heliocentric hypothesis in the words : The opinion of the earth’s motion is of all heresy the most pernicious, the most scandalous. The immovability of the earth is thrice sacred. Argument against the immortality of the soul, the existence of God, and the incarnation, should be tolerated sooner than an argument to prove that the earth moves. But orthodox Protestantism also asked with a doubtful shake of the head: What, if we accept the new theories, becomes of the miracle performed by Joshua; what of the established antithesis between the heavens and the earth, between the infinity of the divine and the finiteness of the terrestrial? If there is no above or beneath, no center and no circumference of the universe, where then is God’s dwelling place? Yes, Protestant orthodoxy also felt distrust whether the new cosmology was not an arbitrary bit of fantastic impiety. But things became worse for the traditional faith when almost two centuries later Darwin announced his theory that the same causes that accomplished the extinction of species might possibly explain their origin. This gave rise to the anticipation of a final triumph of science over religion as held by the orthodox, and the substitution of an all embracing reign of impersonal law for supernatural agency. In spite of the immense prejudice that the theory of evolution aroused, the scientifically oriented among our acquaintances point triumphantly to its victorious invasion of regions once occupied by evangelical Christianity. Has not the folk-lore of Genesis been appraised at its true value? Does not the speech of many pulpits and the significant silence of many more prove con-
[P000064] 62 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW clusively that the books of Darwin have replaced the books of Moses? Does not the Church burn with shame when it recalls the trial at Dayton, Tennessee, and the ridiculous anti-evolution laws of South Carolina and Arkansas? Evangelical Christianity may utter a Nolo contendere, but we are told, it is evident beyond the shadow of a doubt that the orthodox Church, unless it abandons its traditionalism and obscurantism is and will be on the losing side of the battle. Our scientifically minded friends do not refuse, it should be said, a certain involuntary admiration to the stubborn unyieldingness of the evangelical Christian in persevering in his convictions despite the many and increasing difficulties. But, say they, the sad thing is that this (faith attaches to an obsolescent order of things, all of which modern science has changed. Thus orthodoxy has become synonymous with scientific uselessness, and nowhere else is this more true than in America where both the theory and the results of science have more sway than in any part. Nevertheless, speaking in terms of numerical majorities, we may still venture that the case for evangelical religion is not so bad as it may appear to a superficial view. The scientifically minded admit the fact and deplore it. My plea is that in addition to the advantage of numbers, the evangelical cause is still solvent, and that the Gospel it professes is fitted to impart to all sorts and conditions of men, provided they be willing to accept it, every benefit that can be expected from religion. “The time of this life is short,” says a Christian teacher, “nevertheless it is long enough to serve as the discipline for eternal life. God’s sovereignty and faith, God’s kingdom and love—that is the Christian religion. It brings us both rest and activity, and thereby satisfies the need of our souls.” Who can utterly condemn the religion that has conferred these blessings upon countless multitudes? Who can blame those who have received them for their persevering loyalty to their convictions ? Yet we admit that the world in which the ideas of evangelical Christianity originated was not the modern world full
[P000065] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 63 as it is of the glories of science theoretical and applied. We are aware that the question is being seriously put whether to meet the needs of the new age science itself should not undertake the task of making a new religion. A contemporary writer says, “We are at present living, to paraphrase Matthew Arnold’s phrase, between two religions, one dead and one powerless to be born. Or to put it more precisely, between one dying and of irrelevance, and one yet to be more than an infantile hungering after speech.” With this statement most of the scientifically minded would agree, with the exception that they feel quite able to produce a satisfying religion that will replace all present forms of religion Christian and non- Christian. I am going to ask whether this effort to dispossess evangelical Christianity and to transfer the domination in religion to science, whether this eager and enthusiastic movement ought to succeed, and whether there should be any expectation that it ever really will succeed. Let us make the argument so simple that all may be able to follow it even if in the end they be pleased to call it fallacious. For this reason we shall begin by defining our terms, since it is quite necessary for those who are to discuss any matter together to have a common understanding of the meaning of the words they use. What is science? What is religion? What is evangelical Christianity? Science is taken by a recent writer 1 to mean “the latest term in the cumulative process of amassing, organizing and defining human experience. In an evolutionary sense it is the covering term for a rather coherent working body of belief which the principles of selection and adaptation have delivered to us.” Or more briefly, “Science is the sum of organized knowledge.” This definition of science is too narrow for our present discussion. The present use of the term denotes far more than the organized knowledge of this or that field of study. It is a sum of knowledge real and supposed that carries with it a mass of loyalties, attitudes, emotions, and 1 Religious Education, February, 1928, pp. 89-98.
[P000066] 64 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW conations. It is recognized as a power that can control human destiny not only by setting values, but by indicating the way to realize them. Doubtless this is far more than what science really should mean, but the way in which the scientifically minded speak of it today justifies our statement as a description of actual usage. It is much more difficult to arrive at a definition of religion that will command universal assent. This is due in part to the deplorable tendency of taking well known words and broadening their meaning to make them include what should be considered incompatible or even contradictory. Thus H. S. Dimock , 2 after explaining that two methods of ascertaining the meaning of religion are possible—to consider the phenomena which by general consent are called religious, and to trace through the centuries the attempts to define religion formulates the following definition: “religion is a complex of ideas, attitudes, habits, customs, and practices developed by a group as it adjusts itself to its total environment social and natural, in the endeavor to achieve those values and satisfactions which are considered most worthful.” This definition is offered as embodying a consensus of contemporary expert opinion. But can it be correct to define religion as cosmic consciousness and its consequences unless this consciousness include some explicit notion of God? Is not relation to God essential to the entity called religion? We think it is, and in our use of the term we intend to include this relation, and therefore we would amend the foregoing definition by striking out the words “total environment social and natural” and substituting the word “God.” By evangelical Christianity we mean the Christianity that bases its principles on Scripture alone. In spite of the disfavor with which doctrinal statements are received today, it is possible to enumerate these principles, and it is necessary for our present purpose. The evangelical Christian accepts all of the following articles of faith: God, Father, Son, and Holy 2 “Trends in the Redefinition of Religion” ( Journal of Religion, July, 1928. Pp. 434-452).
[P000067] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 65 Ghost, three Persons in one Godhead ; the general revelation of the triune God in nature, in history, and in the heart of man, and the special revelation called the Holy Scriptures, given by inspiration to be the only infallible rule of faith and life; the will of God in creation and in providence; the fall of our first parents and the sinful nature of man; the saving purpose of God made effective in the life, death, resurrection, ascension, session, and second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; our acceptance by God only on the ground of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, accompanied by repentance; our conversion and sanctification by the power of the Holy Spirit ; the immortality of the soul and the resurrection of the body ; the Church, the ministry, and the sacraments; the final judgment and eternal life and eternal death. These statements are by no means exhaustive of all that the Scriptures ask us to believe nor of all that they ask us to do, but as already said we select them in order that we may compare with them the religion which the scientifically minded would have us adopt. Let us, I say, be clear as to the meaning of the terms we are using; and if agreement is not possible, let us at least see to it that we are not misled by any ambiguity of words. Now in estimating the religion that is offered to us in the name of science we should have constantly in mind six concepts which today regulate the thinking of those who would be scientific. One of these is the notion of Function, by which is meant that the facts which science studies are assumed always to be so related that one varies in a determinate and discoverable way with another. The task of science is to discover these relationships and to state them in the most exact terms possible. The world of our experience divides into “universes of factual occurrences” in which to use an analogy from mathematics, some variable is regarded either as given or as chosen, and for this reason called the “independent” variable; the other qualities or magnitudes are the “dependent” variables and are regarded as functions of the former. Every scientific discovery in any field whatever is capable of being
[P000068] 66 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW used as an example of functional analysis. We may now add to this notion of functional analysis other details. “If we were asked,” says Sir Oliver Lodge, “what were the fundamental ideas underlying modern science, I think we should answer Uniformity, Continuity, Evolution.” By uniformity is meant “the general sequence of cause and effect, the inevitableness of consequences, the absence of caprice, the general trustworthiness of nature.” Continuity means that through the whole of material existence, things are not independent one of another. There is always a connection of some kind between them. For example, the earth is attached to the sun; every pebble is attached to the earth ; in short everything is attached to everything else. And yet discontinuity is one of the facts that feature modern science. Substances which in appearance are continuous, like water and metals and rock, are supposed to consist of particles separate and to all appearances isolated from one another. Even energy seems to travel in discontinuous elements called quanta. Evolution is the theory of gradual growth and development through long periods of time as opposed to the sudden production of results in a moment. With Darwin and for fifty years after the notion was emphasized as it applied to life, but in our day the question is raised whether evolution does not apply also to stars and planets, and also to the atoms of which, it is agreed, matter consists. If so, then science must describe the universe as a continuous process, without beginning and without ending. Two other matters of scientific method should be noted: Empiricism and Parsimony. By the former is meant that every scientific hypothesis of the relation betweeen variables is not to be regarded as proved until it is shown to be consistent with all the facts. Note carefully the latter statement. No authoritative assurance, no emotional urging, no will to accept, no traditional belief must ever replace demonstrated conformity with what one is convinced, after careful observation and, where possible, equally careful experiment, has actually happened. Parsimony is the modern use of William
[P000069] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 67 of Occam’s celebrated “razor” : Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem, or as the Doctor singularis et invincibilis also expressed it : “Frustra fit per plura, quod non potest fieri per pauciora.” In the language of the day it means that a sound hypothesis should embody the fewest possible assumptions necessary to make it consistent with the facts, that there is no need to use a complicated scheme of explanation when a simpler one will answer just as well. The classic example is the Copernican astronomy compared with the Ptolemaic. Both profess to explain the observed motions of the heavenly bodies, but the mathematical formulae necessary to express the Ptolemaic choice of coordinates is so incredibly complex, while those of the Copernican hypothesis are relatively so much simpler, that by the law of Parsimony the advantage is with the latter. Therefore science adopts it because it is best fitted to explain the observed facts. By regulating its procedure according to these six principles the scientific investigation of nature has achieved great and wonderful results. Upon this all are agreed. Knowledge of these is required and quite properly too as part of the culture demanded by modern life. But so tremendous are these achievements that science no longer offers itself as classified knowledge of phenomena only; it usurps the functions of metaphysics and axiology, and claims that its cosmic picture entails determinate conclusions as to ultimate being as well as regarding aesthetic, moral, and religious values. Science thus not merely describes our world ; it gives us our world. To be acceptable to the scientifically minded, religious ideas, so we are told, must conform to those great “general conceptions of the universe,” to borrow Professor Huxley’s phrase, “which are forced upon us all, by the progress of physical science.” What is the effect upon the articles of the evangelical faith? Let us trace this out in detail. The evangelical idea of God : Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is no longer tenable since it is a syncretic product of Greek philosophy and the myths of Semitic tribal deities. It is of no
[P000070] 68 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW value to the pragmatic modern mind, and the sooner it is abandoned the better. The divine inspiration, authority and sufficiency of Holy Scripture must be wholly given up. Let us notice that authority and sufficiency depend on divine inspiration. What does this last mean? “The baptism of John,” our Lord once asked, “whence was it? from heaven, or of men?” This question may also be asked concerning Holy Scripture—Whence was it? from heaven, or of men? If the former, its origin is frankly supernatural—holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost ; the Lord’s promise was fulfilled, “the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you” ; and in agreement is what Paul said of his gospel, that he neither received it of man, neither was he taught it, but it came to him by the revelation of Jesus Christ. But the scientifically minded cannot accept this. It assumes the supernatural and the miraculous, the former of which violates the principle of continuity, and the latter the principle of uniformity. Therefore we must say, not “from heaven,” but “of men.” And with this agree, we are told, all the facts that modern “scientific” critical scholarship clearly demonstrates. The Bible is like other ancient books in the manner of its composition. Its content is of course occasionally striking, but in other respects—in language, in the uncritical use of sources, in frequent revisions, in historical, literary, and scientific outlook, in mistakes, blunders, and development—it is just what we find in analogous ancient writings. If Christianity, consequently, is to be abreast of the new knowledge, this mediaeval and obscurantist belief in the Holy Scripture must be rejected. But, the evangelical Christian may protest, does not the Scripture speak in the first instance, and in the last, to the individual? Does not the individual have the right and duty of private judgment in the interpretation of the Word of God ? Can he not say as he reads, “I will hear what God the Lord will speak ?” But the scientifically minded will not grant
[P000071] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 69 this right nor allow this duty. The reader must use the “assured results of modern science,” or the “well attested conclusions of the modern scientific critical study of the Bible.” He must never take anything for granted unless it has the ipse dixit of the great master, modern science. He must never assert Who wrote What unless the exegetical experts confirm the matter. He must never appeal to the law and to the testimony, but to the commentaries, the Bible dictionaries, the philologians, the exegetes, the historians, the archaeologists, the anthropologists, the sociologists, the comparative religionists, and the psychologists, who have all of them the newer and more modern standpoint, for if he does not interpret according to their word, it is an evident sign of obscurantism. His motto must be Credo experto, and on one matter at least every expert is agreed—no one must depart, on pain of forfeiting his title to scholarship, from what the critics tell him must be believed about the Bible. The principle of evolution makes it impossible for the scientifically minded to yield any credence to the old “folktale,” which the Church has elaborated into a dogma, of man’s original perfection and subsequent fall. Nor can he accept the degrading doctrine that man’s nature consequently is depraved and corrupt. This view is entirely out of agreement with the better knowledge of the time, based we are told on an increasing number of authentic facts, that man started relatively imperfect, never knew a fall, and has made through the ages increasing progress. The death of Jesus interpreted as an atonement for sin is, so the men of scientific mind argue, to be explained as a survival of what the anthropologist calls the blood sacrifice complex in primitive man. It is a concept so revolting to the modern mind, that it should be relegated as soon as possible to the limbo of ideas forgotten save in so far as they possess historic interest. The stories of the resurrection and ascension of Jesus are myths invented to enhance His personality. They may once have been effective for so doing, but to the men of the day
[P000072] 70 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW who have caught the vision of the new renaissance of reason, their influence is just the contrary. Justification by faith alone, as traditional Protestantism interprets it, is unacceptable to the best modern psychology of religion. Present day thought finds little satisfaction in a process that does not make really, but only fictitiously righteous. Righteousness can be secured only by an act of conation, not by an intellectual or emotional doing called faith. If therefore we would be justified, we must act in the direction of the values set for us by a developing society. To assign conversion and sanctification to the Holy Spirit is to violate the law of parsimony. Why introduce the metaphysical being which the Church denotes by the name Holy Spirit, when all the phenomena of the experiences in question can be explained perfectly well in terms of the natural? Conversion no matter how sudden and mysterious it may seem is clearly the effect of the maturation of the sub-conscious; sanctification is entirely explicable in terms of the laws of learning. Science can find no evidence worth believing for the immortality or continuance after death of the soul or the conscious aspect of man’s life. The resurrection of the body is a prescientific notion for which the modern man has little use. The last judgment, heaven and hell, are, every one of them, but the Semitic version of widely spread folk pictures of what happens to the “soul” after the death and dissolution of the body. The Church as the Church understands itself, a “divine” institution gifted with the power to preach the Gospel and administer the sacraments, is a pre-scientific notion, entirely unacceptable to the advanced modern and inquiring spirit. The Church is no more “divine” than any other society organized for the attainment of worthy ends. Baptism and the Lord’s Supper for the best liberal scholarship are merely attenuated survivals of ancient religious rites, which have largely lost their significance for a scientific age. Interesting indeed are these applications of the scientific
[P000073] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 7 1 method to the cherished fundamentals of evangelical Christianity, and we should all be acquainted with them. But what I next wish you to note is that our scientifically minded advisors do not leave the evangelical Christian like Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted because they are not. They are not come to destroy but to construct. Therefore they implore us to try to live religiously in a scientific world. They plead with us to use the “scientific” approach; to relinquish the fatal traditions of the fathers; to accept the new conceptions that are becoming everywhere current. “Fill your cup,” they cry, “with the exhilarating wine of the religion that is positively compatible with the scientific interpretation of the world.” What is this religion? What are the articles of the scientific credo ? Let us use the traditional terms, but note the new content that fills them. The scientifically minded confesses : 1 believe in God. There seems to be a general, but not unanimous, conviction among the adherents of the religion of science that some concept of God is necessary. But what God? The variety of definition is baffling. Professor H. N. Wieman demands a “workable idea of God,” by which he means “one which will guide us in making those connections between men and between man and other objects through which the beneficent working of God can fulfill itself in the world.” This sounds well, but who or what is God? This representative of the “School of Chicago” replies with all the sureness of the “new” dogmatism, “God is not the All, God is not identical with the universe. . . . But God is one constitutional tendency of the universe . . . the tendency toward progressive integration.” This is not the only “god” offered to us. There are others, all equally “scientific” if not identical. God is the eternal power, said Thomas Huxley; God is that “veiled” finite Being, or aspect of the Cosmos, who is incessantly struggling to make it better, and with whom we should actively cooperate, says H. G. Wells. For Samuel Alexander the matrix of reality is space and time in so intimate a union that either is an abstraction when taken by itself. From this
[P000074] 72 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW magna mater emerge in the infinite stretches of time ever new qualities of existence, among which it is entirely possible that there may exist “god-like” beings. But these cannot be the ultimate God of religion, since from them new and higher qualities of being may emerge. Therefore Alexander urges upon us the hypothesis that the God we should have is not God but “Deity”—the never ceasing drive of the universe toward newer and higher emergents. Professor Whitehead’s offering is a God who is the principle of concretion of the spatio-temporal relationships into which the universe may be analyzed. We could quote at greater length. The empire of science like the empire of Rome has a pantheon which is rapidly filling with the “gods many” of the eager worshippers fresh from the far flung fields of conquest. The time is ripening for the labor of the comparative “scientific” theologian, but it is not for us to undertake the task. Suffice it to call attention to the fact that there is no emphasis on transcendence and personality; that the concept is a hypothesis of the natural and to be verified by appeal to the facts of the natural, or in other words the God of the scientifically minded is in the category of entities open to observation and experiment. I believe in man. But what is man in the mind of him who is trying to recover in terms of modern thinking one of the foundation concepts of traditional Christianity? He is a being who has arisen, during a period of time estimated variously as ranging from hundreds of thousands to millions of years, from pre-human ancestors. As Mr. Darwin said about the middle of the last century : “Our ancestor was a hairy quadruped furnished with a tail and pointed ears, probably arboreal in his habits.” This is a very interesting and important statement, but was Darwin right? Sir Arthur Keith, speaking in 1927, says: “the fundamentals of Darwin’s outline of man’s history remain unshaken. Nay, so strong has his position become that I am convinced that it never can be shaken.” Science gives us truth, said recently one of the most eloquent of those who actually live in their thinking in terms of the
[P000075] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 73 modern world view, but poetry gives us not truth but beauty. Notice then how beautifully Carl Sandburg in his poem Wilderness broadens the concept and makes it express the mind of the age by including in man’s ancestry not merely the “hairy quadruped” envisaged by Darwin, but the wolf, fox, lion, hog, eagle, mocking-bird, etc. 0, I got a zoo, I got a menagerie, inside my ribs, under my bony head, under my red-valve heart : I am a pal of the world : I came from the wilderness. But as Professor M. C. Otto reminds us 3 we have to deal with “man as what he is, not what he was.” He is a rising being, not a fallen one. His nature is not inherently evil, but at the start neutral and plastic, as capable of unselfishness and friendly helpfulness as of selfishness and destructive pugnacity. I believe in sin. What is sin? For those who are alive to the demands of the modern scientific world sin is not, we are told, the traditional want of conformity to the law of a personal God, but it is lack of approved adjustment to the physical or social environment, and is to be corrected, like all mal-adjustments, by the use of the appropriate means, physical, pedagogical, and ethical. I believe in salvation. If we would recover this great concept and make it workable in the new age, we are advised by the scientifically minded to cleanse it of all its pre-scientific meanings. It refers to the larger fulfillment of the needs of contemporaneous life; it is the actualization of the ideals that grow out of the present scientifically directed industrial democracy. In this realization of a clamant and imperative ideal the “means of grace” are replaced by the “methods of science.” Science offers itself as the infallible and all-powerful technique of religion. Scientific sociology will save society; scientific psychology and pedagogy will save the individual psyche ; scientific medicine will save the body ; scientific economics will save industry; each member of the glorious company of the sciences stands ready to realize upon earth 3Journal of Religion, January 1929. “What is Man ?”
[P000076] 74 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW the kingdom of that God who is the tendency towards the progressive integration of the universe. I believe in the Church. At no point do the scientifically minded show themselves more eager to enter into cordial relationships with evangelical Christianity than in their willingness to use as much of the Christian church as their scientific pre-suppositions will permit. They find that the church is unique in that while all other organizations exist for the furtherance of some specific aspect of the common-weal, the church apparently exists for the sake of helping all causes that need assistance. Therefore no organization can compete with it in its singular opportunity for unlimited usefulness. The church stands for the good life in a good world. The satisfactions that compose this good life are shelter, adequate and helpful food, sex-control, the cure and eradication of disease, security from danger, and the wider social goods called justice, love, friendship, honor, peace, and whatever else may be empirically determined as essential to happy and wholesome human social relationships. The church, therefore, should be retained by the religion of science, but its practices need revision by those who will face fearlessly the questions raised by modern critical thought. The pre-scientific practices of magical rites, worshipful spells, or petitionary prayer, must be done away with, and in their place must be put actions, the content of which expresses symbolically what science expresses propositionally. The elaboration of these symbols has not yet been accomplished, but it may be expected in the near future and indeed is in process of formation by men and women of poetic genius who really feel the scientific attitude in the treatment of religion. I am convinced that the foregoing outline of the religion of science is not chargeable with injustice and misrepresentation. For every statement made it would be possible to cite page and line in books or essays, or to refer to public addresses heard by the present writer, all of them the expression of those who pose as leaders in the task of providing a modern scientific religion for modern scientifically minded men. The
[P000077] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 75 evangelical Christian does not believe this religion. Is his doubt due to the persistence of outworn traditionalism, or the benumbing influence of mediaevalism, of pre-scientific and unserviceable ideas that can no longer be held by any modern right thinking reflective mind, as our friends who take the other side somewhat contemptuously tell us ? Or can he give good reasons for his unbelief? I think that he can, and in the remaining portion of this paper I shall endeavor to set them forth. Let us understand clearly the nature of our task. We are not polemic theologians attacking heresy. We are not presupposing in our opponents belief either in Christianity or in the Christian Scriptures ; we are not discussing differences of doctrinal view, and our court of final appeal is not the Bible as the word of God. But our problem belongs to fundamental apologetics, for it deals with a world view from which we think erroneous inferences are drawn. Our antagonists either deny or doubt evangelical Christianity and the divinely inspired book upon which it takes its stand. Our appeal therefore, is to reason, or if to the Bible, only in so far as reason has proved the Bible to be the word of God. These things are the commonplaces of all the vindicators of evangelical Christianity from Justin Martyr to Bishop Butler, and from Bishop Butler to the present day. They would not be worth mentioning if it were not for the fact that the “new” apologetic discards them, either because it thinks that any Christian appeal to reason is practically worthless, or because it believes that the best way to justify Christianity is to accept all sorts of mediating and concessive views. But we reject each of these opinions, for we hold that Christians are also wisdom’s children and have the right to justify themselves by an appeal to their mother. The arguments in favor of the evangelical position as against the religion of the scientifically minded may be considered conveniently in three main divisions: the first concerning the ethical life which the religion of science would entail; the second concerning the possibility of science fur-
[P000078] y6 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW nishing us with a true or genuine religion ; and the third concerning the ability of such a religion to furnish the soul with the certainty that faith requires. The first of these arguments contends that the religion of science is unable to provide the religious grounding for an ethical system of life at all comparable in blessed effects with that of evangelical Christianity. Let us examine this matter carefully. Every religion offers to our consideration a theology, a ritual, an ethic, and these three are in closest functional relationship. What is the ethic of evangelical Christianity ? Let us review briefly one of the most impressive and beautiful presentations of such a life to be found in all the rich literature of Protestantism upon this topic, in John Calvin’s Institutio relig. Christ. 1559, Lib. III. Cap. VI.-XI. Here our attention is directed first to the Scriptural “plan” for the good life, which in summary is to rouse in our hearts a love of righteousness, and to give us a rule that will prevent us from wandering from the path that leads to blessedness. The incentive consists in placing before our minds such thoughts as the holiness of God, the exemplary character of Jesus Christ, the walk and conversation befitting us as sons of the heavenly Father, that we are temples of the Holy Ghost, that we are immortal both in soul and body, and that therefore we must do nothing to deteriorate either, etc. The “rule” is exemplified in two texts of Scripture: Romans xii. 1, where the apostle beseeches Christians by the mercies of God to dedicate their entire being to the divine service, and Titus ii. n-14, wherein is a clear and brief representation of the several departments of a well regulated Christian life, which Calvin connects with the two tables of the law so far as the negative aspect of conduct is concerned, and then expands into a three-fold doing of duty on the positive side. There must be denial of ungodliness, or of every superstition and all that is repugnant to the serious fear of God, and of worldly lusts, or all carnal affections. Then the Christian must exemplify in every word, deed and thought, sobriety, righteousness, and godliness, or putting the matter at greater
[P000079] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 77 length, he must be chaste and temperate ; must render to every man his due; and by separation from the pollutions of this present evil world and by the practice of true holiness strive earnestly to unite himself to God. Calvin then exhibits these noble and profound ideas in another way. The keynote of the harmonious life that is eager to apprehend the grace of Christ is self-denial exercised in a two-fold sphere : towards our fellow men and towards God. In the former sphere it is evidenced by a joyful and loving service of men for the sake of their bearing the image of God either actually or possibly ; and in the latter it is clearly shown when in all things we subordinate our acts and desires to the great and gracious will of our Father in heaven. We have in the ethical character here depicted a sweet union of all the virtues. Adjectives are hazardous words and may easily fail of their connotative office ; nevertheless, let us attempt to render into English some of the descriptive epithets that Calvin uses. This type of life is when in contact with others, honest, moderate, civil, good-humored, friendly, loving ; towards God, reverent, obedient, dependent, hopeful, at peace; in the presence of life’s many vicissitudes, courageous, patient, diligent, persevering, cheerful, aspiring; in the use of this world’s goods, appreciative, grateful, temperate. Its citizenship is in heaven, and yet it is not a hater of the life that now is nor unthankful to God for His earthly mercies. It takes up the cross, but does so with spiritual joy. It desires the better life in heaven, but it leaves no duty undone here and now. Everyone who has any sense for these things must feel the delight and the beauty of this character. But the misgiving may come that it belongs to The high that proved too high, the heroic for earth too hard, The passion that left the ground to lose itself in the sky, that it is the character of an age that will dawn some day, but is not now. We would not abate one bit of its ideality, and yet it has been exemplified in countless Christian lives, by those who followed after to apprehend that for which they
[P000080] 78 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW were apprehended of Jesus Christ. It has found representatives not in one land but in all ; not at one time but always ; and wherever and whenever it has appeared it has been fruitful of the best and highest things. It has, we may say, so established itself that men value it and are willing to have it produced even if they do not themselves illustrate it. It is important, however, to hold fast to this: that the ethic here outlined is inseparable from a certain set of religious convictions which when made systematic become the theology of evangelical Christianity. Evangelical doctrine and evangelical ethics belong together. Suppress the former, and the latter tends to disappear. It may linger for awhile in the externalities of speech and conduct, but when the inner springs of life dry up, the outer expression is soon over and done for. Now what has the religion of science to propose in the way of ethics? As yet we have no incentive and no rules beyond a complaint that the “old” morality cannot serve this progressive age, and that a new theory of virtue is needed, but what positively this should be is at present undetermined. But of one thing we are sure : it will not be theologically grounded. How indeed could it be, with a concept of God either highly speculative and subject to constant revision or else completely doubtful? with righteousness and virtue mere functions of the physical, and with heaven, hell, and immortality reduced to the status of myth? Men have tried before to construct a practical ethic without the support of religion, and the attempt has never succeeded. Can it be hoped that the present experiment will have any less disastrous termination? Is the moral life possible without religion, and is religion possible without God, Freedom, and Immortality? As our second main argument we propose to show that science cannot furnish a true or genuine religion. How shall we define truth in this connection ? The evangelical Christian is not in doubt as to how to define truth when the reference is to the religion he professes: truth means that it accords with the special revelation of God’s saving mercy that he finds in the Holy Scriptures. But in the argument with the
[P000081] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 79 scientifically minded he is not permitted by the technique of the debate to urge this definition. He must appeal to reason and to reason alone. Now it is possible to presuppose one or all of the current rational definitions of truth, as agreement with reality, or consistency, or practical utility, and still to find something lacking when one inquires as to the meaning of truth when used of poetry, history, fine art, ethics, or religion. Let us assume, as science must do, that the universe is a rational system that will yield its secrets to our reflection. Then must we not call true whatever will give us insight into the structure of the universe, and false whatever prevents or hinders this insight? To put it in another way: the meaning of a thing is not the information it gives concerning its isolated self, but the light it casts on other things. Apply this thought to religion, and we shall readily see that that religion is truest that gives us most insight into the universe in which we live. And this claim the evangelical Christian makes for the Gospel he professes. The life and death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, His person and His teaching, give to the believer a profound insight into the meaning of the world and life and time. But this ultimate insight science cannot give. For notice its procedure as made evident by its history. First with the oldest thinkers of Greece it attempted to understand the world in terms of the physical, that is to say in terms of that which the imagination can picture and the reason can grasp. Then with Plato it was sure that nature could not be truly perceived by the senses nor grasped by the imagination, but only understood by the reason. This meant that “things” were abandoned in favor of the relations between things; relations became everything and things tended to become nothing. Then came the inevitable synthesis in the system of Aristotle: things and relations are equally important, for the former are the matter and the latter are the form of the universe. I have no doubt that to Thales the physicist the thing, water, appealed as that which gave insight into the meaning of reality, and that to Plato the relations which he tried to express in his doctrine of Ideas apparently satis-
[P000082] 8o THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW fied his rational demand for intellectual discernment, and that to Aristotle the combination of matter and form seemed the solution of the ultimate riddles of existence, but the evangelical Christian is quite sure that none of these standpoints yields the God that is needed for a genuine religion. Nor is the case better in the attempts of modern science to transform itself into a religion. To find religion in that physical model of reality which a large portion of contemporary scientific thought is seeking for, in the concrete masses and forces, that is to say, which can be touched and weighed and measured, is so hopeless, that most of these thinkers have abandoned religion entirely and are looking for a substitute. The case is no better when one seeks religion in the relations of the universe, whether mathematical as does Professor Whitehead, or aesthetical or ethical. This tends logically to pantheism, and all objections that can be made to pantheism can be made to it. The effort seems more likely to succeed if, following Aristotle, the present day scientist accepts both the physical models and the relations between them, but unless the God without which religion is impossible is defined as that which is transcendent to both, the result is that combination of polytheism and pantheism which has always been the plague of the religious followers of the Stagirite. The sum of our argument is that unless we posit a God who is above and beyond the world and yet its maker and upholder, we have no true and genuine religion, no religion, that is to say, that gives insight into the intelligible structure of reality. This is the God which to the mind of the evangelical Christian is demanded by the terms of our problem, and this is the God of Christian theism. But the God of the religion of science is in the last analysis merely one more attempt to put the creature in place of the creator. Our third and last argument is that the religion of science cannot give to faith the certainty that faith demands. There are some who deny that faith can ever be certain, and who assure us that faith and certainty are contradictory terms; nay, that the demand for certainty is the evidence of an un-
[P000083] RELIGION OF THE SCIENTIFICALLY MINDED 8l believing heart. But this view is not only a psychological error ; it is opposed to the historic doctrine of faith as evangelical Christianity has understood it. For it is to be noted religious experience is always striving to pass beyond the stage where life consists in mere dialectic, in the defence of this hypothesis against that, in the acceptance of this proposition and the rejection of that. There are moments which the pious soul would feign have permanent, in which it feels absolutely sure of the truth of what it believes and knows beyond the shadow of a doubt the meaning of the peace of God. The history of Christianity tells of this experience and accounts for it not as subjective illusion, but as objectively based in the things that the Gospel offers to our faith as assured facts. Our Lord mentions the peace that passes understanding; Paul speaks of the mystery of godliness that is without controversy; Augustine says truly that the Church does not care to hear wearisome disputes about prayer, but would rather attend to the exercise itself; Thomas Aquinas one day put his inkhorn and writing materials on the shelf, and never wrote or dictated another word of his Summa, saying, “My writing days are over, for such things have been revealed to me that all I have written or taught seems of but small account to me”; and Calvin defines faith as a “firma certaque divinae erga nos benevolentiae cognitio,” a steady and certain knowledge of the divine benevolence towards us, which being founded on the truth of the gratuitous promise of Christ, is both revealed to our minds and confirmed to our hearts by the Holy Spirit. Our contention is that the religion of science cannot meet this demand, and for this reason cannot offer itself as a satisfier of the religious needs of men. The objects it offers for our acceptance are endless hypotheses as to functional relationships, all of which are subject to constant revision, and no one contains any final and absolute truth. God and salvation are for it merely tentative assumptions, and as such cannot satisfy our craving for finality, absoluteness, peace, and certainty. The state of mind they produce is that of “sus-
[P000084] 82 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW pended judgment,” but however inevitable this state may be in view of the results of scientific advance, it is a state that spells disaster to religion, because religion and systematic doubt are incompatible terms. So stated our arguments may seem but dry generalities; their whole force lies in their application. The evangelical Christian claims to have a system of ethical incentives and rules of conduct grounded in a religion which gives him the deepest insight into the meaning of his life and the universe in which it is lived, and in this he feels the peculiar satisfaction which is termed the certainty of faith. He further claims that if experience has established anything, it has firmly attested the validity of evangelical Christian experience. He does not believe that the religion of science can give either the morality or the insight or the certainty that he enjoys, but is convinced that if perchance this religion should prevail, it would result in disaster, for it would effectually stop the religious advance of the spirit of man and fetter him in the evils from which he must be set free before any progress is possible. Thus stated the issue is not between one set of values and another either of which might be selected and a measure of good result, but between truth and falsehood: the falsehood that enslaves and kills, the truth that sets free and carries on to larger life. Lincoln University, Pa. George Johnson.
[P000085] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? The advocate of the so-called “modern” view of the Bible occupies a difficult and in some respects anomalous position. If he emphasizes too strongly the novelty of the views which he advocates, if he makes the break with the past definite and unmistakable, he is certain to alienate and antagonize many whom he would feign win for his opinions. If, on the other hand, he minimizes their novelty, if he identifies them too closely with views which are familiar and traditional, those who are in search of the new and up-to-date will be disappointed and look elsewhere for light and leading. Consequently the attempt is frequently made to steer a middle course between these two extremes: to present new and even radically destructive views but at the same time to maintain that they are really quite consistent with views which are old and precious. A good example of such a middle course was furnished a few years ago by Dr. George A. Barton in a book entitled The Religion of Israel. The opening paragraph reads in part as follows : Religion may be viewed from either the human or the divine point of view. From the divine standpoint God reveals truth; from the human, man discovers it. . . . Viewed from the divine side revelation has been progressive; looked at from the human, it has been evolutionary. He who speaks of the evolution of religion does not thereby deny the divine element, nor he who speaks of revelation, the human factor. If, then, in the following pages we seek to trace the evolution of the religion of Israel, we shall be but treating in the favorite phraseology of the time the progress of revelation in Israel. The above statement sounds very simple ; it seems to point to a very easy solution of the problem of reconciling “the old faith and the new knowledge.” Revelation and evolution are merely two sides of the shield—the divine and the human : the difference lies solely in the point of view. But unfortunately the revelation and the evolution sides of the religion of the Old Testament cannot be harmonized after this easy fashion. In proof of this it will suffice to take a single illustration. If we turn to Ex. xx in our Bibles, we read there that the Deca-
[P000086] 84 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW logue was proclaimed by the Lord, from Mt. Sinai, to the children of Israel, in the days of Moses. The narrative is quite explicit with regard to this. Whether the statements are true or not, there is no uncertainty or ambiguity as regards place, time, speaker or auditors. This we may consider the “revelation” account of the giving of the Ten Commandments. But Dr. Barton tells us that seven of the commandments contained in this decalogue are different from the commands in the earlier decalogue (that of J), “which, it has been conjectured, goes back to the time of Moses.” 1 And he tells us: “It is a plausible conjecture that these commands were conceived by Elijah and his followers to be more in accord with the demands of Yahweh, the champion of social justice, than the ritualistic decalogue of J .” 2 This is the “evolution” account of the giving of the Decalogue. It is quite obvious, we think, that these two accounts are not and cannot be regarded as merely two sides or aspects of the same event. Looked at merely from the standpoint of chronology, they are incompatible ; and the attempt to harmonize them can lead only to confusion. If the variation between “standard” and “daylight saving” time has caused and is causing many people in certain parts of the U.S.A., even quite intelligent people, serious difficulty and annoyance when the difference between the two is only an hour, how can the Bible student fail to be confused when he is asked to reckon time by two chronometers, one of which lags behind the other by some centuries? It is far better and much less confusing to state frankly that the differences between two such accounts is real and irreconcilable. If one of them is true, the other is false. They cannot both be true . 3 1 A decalogue carved out of Ex. xxxiv. and regarded as more primitive because all of its commands are “ritualistic.” E.g., the tenth as Dr. Barton arranges them is “Thou shalt not seethe a kid in its mother’s milk.” 2 Op. ext., pp. 9of. 3 J. E. McFadyen, in his Old Testament Criticism, declares that “the differences between the traditional and the critical view are ‘immense.’ ” Yet in the same sentence he goes on to say “but it is equally true that these differences do not touch the religious essence of Scripture: they
[P000087] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 85 There are a good many advocates of the “modem” view who recognize the necessity of stating quite clearly the difference between the old view and the new. And while their presentation of the new views may startle and shock, it is much better that the truth should be told. If the “evolution” account of Israel’s early religious history is true, if it is correct to say with Professor Kennett, “Of the religion of the tribes of Israel proper at the time of the conquest of Palestine we have no direct information ; all the stories relating to this period are written for the edification of later ages and are coloured by their circumstances,” 4 then the “revelation” account, according to which the bulk of the Pentateuch is mainly concerned with telling us just this very thing, namely what the religion of Israel was as ordained by God through Moses, must be quite unreliable and even false. There is no middle ground. The two views are not merely two sides of the same thing ; they are diametrically opposed ; and it is the part of wisdom to recognize this. At the same time most of those who hold the “modern” view are eager to avoid making the break between the new view and the old abrupt and final. Especially are they eager to find support for their opinions in the teachings of the New Testament and particularly in the words of Jesus. One of the most recent attempts in this direction is that of Dr. James H. Snowden in his book, Old Faith and New Knowledge. This book is not significant because of its originality. Dr. Snowden makes no claim to be original. The first sentence of the preface states that “This book may contain little that has not been said before, but the same things must be constantly reaffect questions of method, of standpoint, of history, of chronology, of literature.” These he considers non-essential. For he adds, “but in points that are vital to the faith of both parties the supporters of the older view and the critics who are not biassed by a theory—are in perfect harmony.” How one who holds the views of Dr. McFadyen can make such a preposterous statement is hard to understand. 4 Hastings, Encycl. of Religion and Ethics, art. “Israel,” p. 400. Cf. art. “The Conflict over the Old Testament” in this Review for January, 1923, p. 89.
[P000088] 86 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW stated as the trees bring forth the same leaves and fruits year after year.” But the book is sufficiently noteworthy because of the position of its author and the views which he presents. Dr. Snowden was for some years professor of Systematic Theology and now occupies the chair of Apologetics in the Western Theological Seminary of the Presbyterian Church, U.S.A. He was for several years editor of The Presbyterian Magazine, which is conducted under the authority of the General Assembly of that Church. He is at present the editor of The Presbyterian Banner. He wields the pen of a ready writer and he has for some years published annually a volume of “helps” on the International Sunday School Lessons. Consequently Dr. Snowden’s views upon the subject “Old Faith and New Knowledge” should be of interest to many evangelical Christians, but especially to Presbyterians. Dr. Snowden does not use the word “modernism” in his preface. He tells us that “The purpose of the book is to take a general view of the relations of faith and knowledge or of religion and science and especially to trace the process of their adjustment through the Bible itself.” But this process of “adjustment” is merely another name for modernism ; and the word occurs constantly. One of Dr. Snowden’s numerous definitions is the following: “We, then, adopt as our definition of modernism and the sense in which we use it throughout this discussion the following : Modernism is the principle and progressive process of continually unifying our growing experience in knowledge and life.” 5 While the whole of the preceding sentence is placed in italics by Dr. Snowden, the word which should be especially emphasized is “unifying.” Dr. Snowden uses this or similar words very frequently . 6 The modernist, he tells us, is “one who endeavors to bring all his knowledge up to date and adjust it to the thought and life of to-day.” 7 Consequently we find that everyone who has 5 P. 22. 8 Cf. e.g., pp. 107, 127, 145 , 164, 176, 179, 189, 192, 207, 223, 261, 263, et passim. 7 P. 21.
[P000089] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 87 stated new truth or has sought to bring the new into harmony with the old, or rather, to adjust the old to the new, is claimed as a modernist by Dr. Snowden. From Abraham to Paul, from Clement of Rome to Sir Oliver Lodge, Dr. Snowden instances many, including the Lord Himself, who were modernists or held the principle of modernism. Abraham “modernized his old faith into the new, and, therefore, he was a modernist in his day and an example for us in our day.” “In the true and proper sense of the term, Moses was a modernist.” The prophets had “the spirit of 'modernism.” “Peter ... refused to stand still in the tracks of the fathers, but moved forward as new light fell upon his path. Peter also was a modernist.” Stephen was “the first martyr for modernism.” At the Council of Jerusalem, “Modernism won and this is why we are Christians to-day.” Paul was “the master modernist.” 8 In short, “The whole Bible 8 As the above phrase would imply Dr. Snowden is quite enthusiastic about the modernism of Paul. He declares that Paul “had a sponge-like mind to soak up both Greek and Hebrew learning and expressly taught and practiced the art of appropriating truth from any source’’ (p. 167). He is especially impressed by the address on Mars’ Hill and describes it as “a splendid instance of the principle of modernism and of its practice.” He tells us that Paul “did not reject the Greek faith and did not even show disrespect to the idol in which it was embodied.” On the contrary he declares that Paul “proceeded to pour upon that poor dumb idol the light of the gospel and transformed it into a stepping-stone up into the glorious light of God as Creator and of ‘the Man . . . that He hath raised from the dead.’” We have here a good illustration of a certain looseness of thinking which at times destroys the force of Dr. Snowden’s arguments. Dr. Snowden in this paragraph four times uses the words “idol” or “idol worship.” Yet the narrative tells us expressly that what had impressed Paul was an altar to an unknown god. Had Paul desired to use an idol as a “stepping-stone” to Christ, the Greco-Roman pantheon was full of them. Zeus, Hermes, Ares, Aphrodite were household names. But the idols of paganism, even a cultured paganism, were utterly abhorrent to a faithful disciple of Moses and of Christ. Had Paul wished to adapt Christianity to the Greek religion, the mythology and the cultus of that religion furnished him abundant material. But he did not turn to them. It was an altar to “an unknown God” which captured his imagination. And when he proceeded to give to that abstract and empty concept the reality and content of Christian faith, his words fell on deaf
[P000090] 88 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW in principle and method and spirit is a modernistic book.” 9 In view of such sweeping assertions, it is important that we should carefully define our terms. If the greatest figures of the Bible, the Lord and His apostles included, were modernists, it goes without saying that every Christian should seek to be one also. If a modernist is simply “one who endeavors to bring all his knowledge up to date and adjust it to the thought and life of to-day,” every honest and intelligent man is and should be a modernist, provided of course the thought and life of today is in harmony with truth and reality. This important proviso needs to be made, for, as Dr. Snowden recognizes, “new” and “true” are not necessarily synonymous terms. He tells us frankly that modernism “may incorporate and often has incorporated error as well as truth .” 10 No one could denounce behaviourism more emphatically than Dr. Snowden does, notwithstanding the fact that it is very popular today. He tells us that a Chicago professor has “tossed it upon the scrap-heap of baseless theories and vagaries.” He declares that “It is obviously self-contradictory: for it uses consciousness to deny consciousness, consciousness first cutting its own throat and then loudly declaring that it is dead.” 11 Behaviourism is new, but it is not true, Dr. Snowden himself being witness. What, then, is modernism? “Modernism,” Dr. Snowden assures us, “is a principle and a method and not a doctrine,” 12 the principle of up-to-dateness; and he tells us: There are modernists who do reject the supernatural in all its forms, but this is the result of their application of the principle of modernism and is not the principle itself ; and there are other modernists who accept the supernatural in its thorough-going sense, and this also is the result of their application of the principle and is not the principle itself. It is vital to any proper discussion of this subject that we keep the principle of ears. Paul strove to preach the Gospel tactfully ; he did not try to adapt it to pagan creeds and customs. 9 P. 170. 10 P. 179. 11 P. 232. 12 P. 21.
[P000091] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST ? 89 modernism apart from the results of its application by different students; and the same is true of fundamentalism. 13 But it is hard to hold principles without applying them ; a method is of little value unless it leads to practical results. And it is important to note that Dr. Snowden does not succeed in keeping the two distinct; in fact he hardly even attempts to do so. One of his fullest definitions of modernism is given where he is discussing “the principle of modernism in the Bible.” He tells us : Modernism as defined and held by this writer is the principle and spirit of holding and expressing our religious faith and theological doctrines as interpreted in the light of the established knowledge of our day, or the process of progressively unifying our total knowledge and experience, and let no fundamentalist untruthfully impute to him modernism in his own sense of “agnostic modernism” or in any other sense than that which the writer himself has declared and hereby declares that he holds it.14 Here Dr. Snowden speaks definitely of “the established knowledge of our day,” as normative for the expressing and interpreting of religious faith and theological doctrines in modern times. Elsewhere he tells us that in the nineteenth century Christian faith was confronted with the results and spirit of modern science “and had to adjust itself to them at whatever cost of compromise.” 18 What does this established knowledge, to which Christianity has had to adjust itself at whatever cost of compromise , include? At least two things—“evolution” and “higher criticism.” Dr. Snowden assures the reader very positively that a modernist, at least an up-to-date modernist, must be an evolutionist and, as regards the Bible, a “higher critic.” Speaking of evolution, he denies that it is a mere theory or guess, he cites “eight ‘facts’ or ‘things done’ ” which taken together prove “the biological evolution of life from simple beginnings.” 18 He does not attempt to conceal his contempt for those who 13 P. 22. 14 P. 107. 15 P. 177. 16 Pp. 21 2f.
[P000092] 90 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW have the temerity to question these facts . 17 And he exclaims : “How long will our well-meaning but ill-informed opponents of evolution carry on their war on this theory, a war on the scientific knowledge and higher culture of the world, a war that is perfectly futile and was long since hopelessly lost?” He asserts that “it is accepted and wrought into the structure of systematic theology in practically all our standard theological institutions” ; 18 and he declares that “we should have 17 One of these “facts” is that of “geological succession.” Dr. Snowden tells us : “This fact shows that the genealogical tree of living forms runs its rocky roots down through all the strata of the earth. At the bottom are found traces of the simplest forms of life and these grow into or are succeeded by higher types up through the whole sixty miles of stratified rock, culminating in vertebrates and man at the top. What is the meaning of this succession of fossil forms but that this was the order of their development?” (p. 212). “Sixty miles of stratified rock”! Sixty miles of rock exhibiting the evolution of life from the lowest to the highest forms ! We read this statement and rub our eyes in amazement. Where are these sixty miles of stratified rock, where we can find the history of the development of life written as on tables of stone? Mt. Everest is less than 6 miles high. The greatest known depth of the ocean is only 6 miles. No one has reached the top of Mt. Everest; no one has descended to the ocean’s depths. Yet Dr. Snowden speaks of sixty miles of stratified rock! How is this total reached? In only one way,—by adding together the totals of different strata lying far removed one from another in various parts of the earth’s crust, on the assumption that they are members of a series and that these members are properly arranged, i.e., arranged in accordance with the theory of evolution. To those who are accustomed to speak glibly in terms of “sixty miles of stratified rocks,” it must be rather disconcerting to be reminded by such a know-nothing among the geologists as George McCready Price that “the total thickness of stratified rocks found piled in any one locality is never more than a few thousand feet.” All the rest of the sixty miles is theory. Yet Dr. Snowden speaks of these sixty miles as if they represented a panorama of life which any man can visit and study at his leisure. It is small wonder that Dr. Snowden speaks so contemptuously of Professor Price and pokes fun at the editor of this Review for being so ignorant as to publish one of his articles. It is much easier to ridicule than to refute. 18 Dr. Snowden quotes a single sentence from Dr. William Brenton Greene, Jr., of Princeton Seminary, to the effect that “Evolution is taught in this institution [Princeton] as one of the ways of God’s working,” as proof that “Princeton comes near making it unanimous.” He uses this single sentence which was published in a symposium in The Christian Standard, and which is so brief that it can easily be misunderstood. But he ignores completely Dr. Greene’s elaborate discussion of Evolution in this
[P000093] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 91 the intelligence and wisdom to see and welcome this tremendous instance and triumph of modernism.” Dr. Snowden speaks with equal positiveness with regard to the higher criticism of the Old Testament. 19 He states frankly that “the general result of this study has been to assign most of the books of the Old Testament to other times and authors than the traditional ones.” He places first among such conclusions the documentary theory of the Pentateuch according to which “it assumed its final form after the Exile in Babylon, probably at the hands of Ezra.” He tells us that “Daniel falls about 168 b.c., in the time of the persecution of the Jews by Antiochus Epiphanes, where it fits in like a key in its lock. Other books, including many of the Psalms, Chronicles, Jonah, Ecclesiastes, Job and Proverbs, fall in post-Exilic time.” He concludes this brief summary with the statement : “The evidence for these processes and for some of these results lies upon the surface of these books and is visible even to English readers, and the results have the practically unanimous support of modern scholars.” Clearly Dr. Snowden is a “higher critic.” But still clearer is it that Dr. Snowden does not accept “higher criticism” merely in theory. He is equally positive in asserting the validity of the “assured results.” Consequently it appears that while Dr. Snowden may start out with modernism simply as a principle of up-to-date-ness, he ends by identifying it with evolution and higher criticism both as theories and as systems embracing very definite conclusions or “facts.” In view of the importance which Dr. Snowden attaches to Review for October 1922, in which Dr. Greene points out the dangerous fallacies in that theory and declares that while “the Supernaturalistic explanation of the pertinent facts of geology and palaeontology . . . asserts and maintains ‘evolution within limits’ or ‘within the type’ ” it also maintains that “God created the different species” (p. 549). This is a totally different thing from saying with Sir Arthur Thomson, one of Dr. Snowden’s Christian evolutionists, that “there is at no stage any intrusion of extraneous factors.” It is the “intrusion” of the supernatural as an extraneous factor that the evolutionist goes to such lengths to avoid. 19 Pp. 91 f.
[P000094] 92 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW both “evolution” and “higher criticism” as significant illustrations and instances of modernism, examples so important that the man of today cannot be “modern” who does not accept both, the question whether the Bible is a modernistic book ceases to be the general question whether its contents were up-to-date when they were written. Rather it tends to become the specific one, whether its teachings are in harmony with the theories and conclusions of the evolutionist and the critic of today. In short, Dr. Snowden uses two quite different definitions of modernism in the course of his book. In speaking of Abraham as a modernist, he does not mean of course that Abraham was a Darwinian in science or a Wellhausian in religion. He means simply that Abraham had an open mind to new truth and tried to relate the new truth which came to him to the knowledge which he already had. And the same might be said in general of the great men of both sacred and profane history who lived before the nineteenth century. They are claimed as modernists only in the sense that they were abreast of and added to the knowledge of the age in which they lived. But by starting with a definition of modernism which is very general and abstract and ending with one which is quite specific and which commits the modernist to the acceptance of certain very definite conclusions, which, Dr. Snowden to the contrary notwithstanding, are still unproved and so debatable, he is likely to confuse the reader, who may fail to note the important distinction between the two senses in which the word “modernism” is used in this volume. In asking the question, Was Jesus a Modernist? we are not discussing whether Jesus was and is up-to-date. No Christian can for one moment question this without admitting that Christianity in so far as it is really Christian belongs to “the things that are shaken,” and so are to be done away. What we are concerned to know is whether in its twentieth-century meaning, which involves the acceptance of evolution and higher criticism, Jesus was a modernist. We shall consider this question, as briefly as we may, in three important aspects : (i) Jesus’ attitude toward the Old Testament; (2) Jesus’
[P000095] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 93 attitude toward the God of Early Israel; (3) Jesus’ attitude toward one of the typical “wonders” of Holy Writ, Jonah. Jesus and the Scriptures What was Jesus’ attitude toward the Scriptures of the Old Testament which were the Bible of the Jews at the time of His earthly ministry? Dr. Snowden tells us that it was one of reverence. Jesus used and revered the Old Testament. He was brought up on it in the home, it was his text-book in the village school, and it was used in the worship in the synagogue at Nazareth. It was by feeding on this book that he “advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man.” He was familiar with the stirring scenes of its history, its stories of national heroes, its dramatic events, triumphs and tragedies, its poetry and prophecy. He sang its psalms and had his imagination kindled with the sublime visions of Isaiah and the grand drama of Job. He sunk all his roots into it and absorbed its teaching and spirit into his soul .20 What is the attitude of modernism to the Old Testament as it is understood by Dr. Snowden ? It is this : The most distinctive thing about the Old Testament is that it is old. It has done its work and belongs to the past. It has “waxed old” and is now “done away.” It is one of “those things that are shaken, as of things that have been made, that those things which are not shaken may remain.” It is like the stratified rocks under our feet that are full of fossils which once were living forms but are now dead and turned to stone. This is not to disparage the Old Testament, for it was new and useful in its day. And this is just the point we are now about to make. The Old Testament was once the New Testament. In its day it was up to date and was a modernist book. Its old faith advanced with new knowledge and this kept it abreast of the times. When its day had passed it fell behind and was numbered with the things of yesterday; it passed into the museum of fossilized religion and extinct theology. Yet it still remains as a foundation on which we build and as an old root out of which new truth grows and blooms .21 The statement which we have just quoted is a remarkable one. Dr. Snowden tells us that the language which he uses regarding the Old Testament is not intended to “disparage” it; “for it was new and useful in its day.” But he does not 20 P. 134- 21 P. 109.
[P000096] 94 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW hesitate to assure us quite emphatically that its day is past and that it has been relegated to “the museum of fossilized religion and extinct theology.” In this same quotation he defines fossils as things “which once were living forms but are now dead and turned to stone.” We do not hesitate to say that we have read statements frankly intended to disparage the Old Testament which were far less derogatory to it than this. We have heard the Old Testament called hard names. But this statement by Dr. Snowden cannot easily be surpassed. Dr. Snowden belongs to a denomination which has a Hymnal. At the back of this Hymnal there is a “Psalter.” This Psalter contains sixty selections, averaging twenty to thirty verses each. All are taken from the Old Testament Psalms ; and they are intended for use in the public worship of Almighty God. We imagine that they are used regularly by most of the congregations of the Presbyterian Church to which Dr. Snowden belongs. Yet according to Dr. Snowden the Psalms passed centuries ago “into the museum of fossilized religion and extinct theology.” A more grievous misrepresentation, it would be hard to find. “If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone?” Either the ministers of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. are calling upon their congregations once or twice every Sunday to resurrect some of the “fossils” of an all but forgotten past, to feed on “stones,” or else Dr. Snowden has traduced and defamed some of the most precious possessions of the Christian believer of today. The Old Testament Psalms are pre-eminently the book of devotion of the Christian Church. They are not “fossils”; they are not “dead and turned to stone.” They are full of living truth because they are the words of the living God. They have brought blessing and comfort and life to countless generations of believers. They were the solace of the persecuted saints on the desolate moors of Scotland and in the mountain fastnesses of the Waldensees. Martyrs went to the stake with psalms on their lips. They have been read and chanted and sung in every part of the Christian Church ; and will continue to be so used while
[P000097] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 95 time shall last . 22 “Fossils” ! Every Christian who is loyal to God’s word will emphatically repudiate such an outrageous metaphor. Indeed, Dr. Snowden cannot finish the paragraph without contradicting himself. For, after saying that the Old Testament has “passed into the museum of fossilized religion and extinct theology,” he goes on to say in the very next sentence, “Yet it still remains as a foundation on which we build and as an old root out of which new truth grows and blooms.” New truth does not grow from and bloom from fossils. Elsewhere he tells us, in speaking of the Old Testament prophets, “Our democracy has not yet caught sight of their political ideals, our social order lags far behind their social gospel, our League of Nations and dreams of world peace are but the blades and buds of seeds they planted, and our utmost achievements grow pale and pitiful in the light of their splendid visions .” 23 Such language is not appropriate as a description of a book which has “passed into the museum of fossilized religion and extinct theology.” But it is the nemesis of the modernist to despise the past, especially when he cannot harmonize its truth with the wisdom of the present. And when Dr. Snowden speaks as a modernist there is a lack of reverence in his words which as every one knows who has read the Gospels at all attentively is quite different from the attitude of Jesus toward the Old Testament. One of the clearest statements of Jesus’ attitude toward the Old Testament is found in the Sermon on the Mount, “Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets : I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, 22 In his commentary on The Psalms (1902) Prof. Kirkpatrick has an informing chapter on “The Psalter in the Christian Church.” His first sentence is “If a history of the use of the Psalter could be written, it would be a history of the spiritual life of the Church.” He declares that “The voices of holy men in every age unite in bearing a concordant testimony to the power and preciousness of the Psalms”; and cites by way of illustration from Athanasius, Basil, Augustine, Luther, Calvin and Dean Church. 28 P. 129.
[P000098] 96 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.” Dr. Snowden tells us that when Jesus several times in this same discourse says, “But I say unto you,” He “contradicts Moses.” He asserts that “Jesus put himself above the Scriptures and made them subservient to himself. . . . He revised and corrected them and brought them up to the level of his own light and leading. He modernized the Old Testament with the New and in this sense he was a modernist.” Yet Jesus expressly described His own attitude toward the Old Testament as “fulfilment.” He nowhere intimated that the Law was not given by Moses, or that it incorrectly expressed the will of God for Israel. But He did claim that it contained elements which were temporary and were to give place to that which was higher and better. The fact that Jesus recognized the Old Testament as of divine origin and authority, yet placed His own authority above it is a striking proof of His consciousness of His divine mission, of His Oneness with God. This is latent in the words “But I say unto you.” The “I” is all important. Jesus speaks with the authority of God. Dr. Snowden assures us that “the Pharisees were the fundamentalists of their day” and that they “tried to fasten their fundamentalism” on Jesus, but that “against their conservatism he opposed his liberalism, and against their fundamentalism he put his modernism.” He describes the belief that the Messiah was to come as a conqueror to break the yoke of Rome and set up a worldly kingdom at Jerusalem as “a fundamental doctrine of the Pharisees.” He tells us that Jesus came into violent conflict with their teaching on this point, and that this led to His death: “they fell upon him in fury and crushed him on a cross.” And he further assures us that in thus breaking with the fundamentalism of the Pharisees, Jesus “was keeping pace with the growing light of revelation, and this is the principle of modernism.” It should hardly be necessary, we think, to remind the reader that in His controversies with the Pharisees, Jesus consistently appears as a defender and expounder of the true teachings of the
[P000099] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 97 Old Testament Scriptures against their misinterpretations and human additions. Again and again He met them with the words “It is written.” In rejecting their conception of the Messiah as an earthly king, He was fulfilling the Old Testament teaching while rejecting the “traditions” of men. The Gospel narratives show plainly that Jesus accepted fully the belief of the Pharisees that the Old Testament Scriptures were the Word of God. He said emphatically, “The Scripture cannot be broken.” He condemned them for making naught that word by their traditions. He refuted the new knowledge of men with the old wisdom of God. Especially distressing is it to find Jesus spoken of as “keeping pace with the growing light of revelation” as if He were striving to keep abreast of the best thought and knowledge of His day, lest He be left behind in the march of human progress. Jesus was Himself the supreme revelation of God, the Way, the Truth and the Life. He was not a man following the gleam ; He was the Light. Finally Dr. Snowden assures us that “in his teaching Jesus spiritualized the Old Testament at a stroke.” Properly understood, we believe that this is true. In His Person and in His words and works Jesus fulfilled the types and ritual of the Old Testament, spiritualizing and universalizing the Jewish religion. But this does not mean that Jesus discarded the Old Testament or contradicted its teachings. How hard put to it Dr. Snowden is in trying to prove that Jesus is a modernist is shown by his use of such illustrations as the following. Commenting on the words uttered by Jesus’ hearers on a certain occasion, “What is this? A new teaching!” (Mk. i. 27), Dr. Snowden says, “Jesus, a teacher of new theology ! This surely was modernism.” Again, he tells us, that “the first recorded command in the preaching of Jesus was ‘Repent ye’ (Mk. i. 15), a word that means ‘change your mind,’ ” asserting that “the first imperative word in the preaching of Jesus expressed or at least implied the principle of modernism.” Yet it is perfectly obvious that what Jesus was calling upon the people to do was to repent of their sins. Dr. Snowden
[P000100] 98 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW finds in the parables and passages in which the gospel is likened to seed an illustration of the principle of modernism, because they “imply growth and progress,” arguing that “the analogy of the gospel to seed implies that it will be subject to like changes.” Yet it is plain, we think, that in these parables Jesus is not speaking of changes in the seed due to its adapting itself to the soil, but showing that the seed cannot grow and bear fruit if the soil is bad. It may kill the seed; it may hinder its fruitfulness ; it cannot change its nature. He argues that Jesus’ teaching that men should “put new wine into fresh wineskins” means that “twentieth century Christianity cannot be contained in fifth century or fifteenth century creeds and confessions.” The real point is, Can it be contained in New Testament Christianity? And finally in such words as “Other sheep I have which are not of this fold” and “I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now,” he argues that Jesus “provides for the progressive revelation of truth through all the ages.” This he tells us “includes the written Gospels and the Letters of Paul and all subsequent Christian literature,” implying that there is no essential difference between the New Testament and extra-canonical literature. Yet the Westminster Confession of Faith expressly states that “The whole counsel of God, concerning all things necessary for his own glory, man’s salvation, faith, and life, is either expressly set down in Scripture, or by good and necessary consequence may be deduced from Scripture : unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new revelations of the Spirit or traditions of men .” 24 He even assures us that Jesus “cast His teaching in biological and evolutionary concepts, which are the current coin of our modern world.” In short, Dr. Snowden not merely finds in the teaching of Jesus a timeless element which makes it accord with the modernism of all ages, but he even claims that Jesus’ teachings are in harmony with the views of the twentieth century evolutionists. It is hardly necessary, we think, to point out that Dr. Snowden’s use of such passages as we have just 24 Chap. I, ‘Sec. VI.
[P000101] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 99 quoted, involves a theological tour de force which suggests the allegorizing methods of an Origen. What Jesus’ real attitude toward the Old Testament and how radically it differed from that of the “modernist” of today will become increasingly clear as we consider His conception of the God of Early Israel and contrast this conception with that of the “modernist” critics. “The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob” One of the most remarkable illustrations of Jesus’ attitude toward the Old Testament is found in the course of his argument with the Sadducees about the resurrection (Mk. xii. 18-27). Brushing aside as unworthy of serious consideration their carefully elaborated theological “difficulty”—the woman with the seven husbands—He proceeds to show that the true answer is clearly given in the Old Testament Scriptures. It is very significant that in doing this He does not turn to the writings of the post-Exilic period, to “Maccabean” Daniel, who is thought by some critics to have “borrowed” the doctrine from Zoroastrianism. Instead He goes back to one of the great events in Israel’s ancient history, the Call of Moses, to the revelation made to Moses at “the bush.” More noteworthy still, He selects from the record of this revelation to Moses a phrase referring to a then distant past, the time of the patriarchs : “I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.” And from these words which are intended to show that the God who reveals Himself to Moses is the God who had in times past manifested Himself to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, He deduces the great doctrine of the resurrection. If God is the God of the patriarchs, they must live; for “God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.” It would be hard to find a statement which illustrates more clearly the wealth of meaning which Jesus found in the Scriptures of the Old Testament. But the point which concerns us especially is the positiveness with which He identifies the God of the patriarchs and of Moses with the God whom He called His Father and the Father of
[P000102] IOO THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW His own disciples. It was the living God who called Abraham and Moses, who spake through the prophets, the one God whose demand of His people has ever been that they love Him with all the heart and soul and might. On the other hand, it is one of the most emphatically stated contentions of the “critics” that the God of the Old Testament, or, we would better say, the conception of that God, passed through a process of development, or rather rectification, so drastic that between the God of the pre-prophetic period and the God of the Prophets and of Jesus, there is a difference so great that it tends to become an impassable gulf. Dr. Snowden does not state this view in its most extreme form. But the language which he uses is sufficiently strong to startle and amaze anyone who has a real love for the Old Testament. He speaks of the God of the early period as a “tribal God.” Writing of the character of that God, he tells us that At first it was strongly and sometimes grossly anthropomorphic. God was viewed as having a literal body with fleshly organs and senses. He was hungry for food and delighted in fat and in the smell of burnt meat (Lev. iii). Jehovah also was viewed as having human virtues of strength and bravery and faithfulness to His friends and with human passions of vindictiveness and hate, sparing none of His enemies but slaying “both man and woman, infant and suckling” (x Sam. xv. 3). These were conmon views of their gods held by all the neighboring pagan tribes and the Hebrews shared in them. 26 This is sufficiently clear. But let us hear Dr. Snowden a little further. Jehovah thus starts out as the tribal God of the Hebrews clothed upon with clouds of human limitation and imperfection and with the dark shadows of human passion, but as He strides onward through expanding Hebrew faith and knowledge these human imperfections fall off and He finally stands forth in all the majesty and glory and beauty of the one sovereign and spiritual and holy and good God in whom we clearly discern the lineaments of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is a long distance from the God of Sinai and the wilderness and the times of the Judges to the God of Amos and Isaiah and the Exile. Broader knowledge and clearer revelation and richer spiritual experience took the steps that lay between these stages and brought the old faith to the new vision. The principle of modernism was again exemplified. 26 P. 125.
[P000103] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? IOI It would be easy, were it necessary, to produce abundant proof that Dr. Snowden in the quotations which we have just given has not overstated, but if anything understated the conclusions of the modernists with regard to the pre-prophetic period in Israel. To them the work of the “writing” prophets was nothing short of revolutionary. Wellhausen speaks of the prophets as “destroying Old Israel.” 26 A popular protagonist for their views, Dr. Fosdick, tells us that he does not see how any one can “identify the god” 27 (sic!) of the Conquest with “the God (sic!) revealed in the greatest of the Hebrew prophets and, above all, in Christ.” He holds that “They are not of one spirit.” Another recent writer has stated it crudely and blasphemously as follows: “They transformed a jealous demon who roared and belched fire from the crater of a volcano, into a transcendent spirit of Love. They took a bloody and remorseless protector of a desert people, and without realizing it, changed him into the Merciful Father of all mankind. In fine, they destroyed Yahweh and created God !” 28 In criticism of this view, we shall briefly consider three points suggested by the language of Dr. Snowden : ( i ) “the tribal God of the Hebrews”; (2) “strongly and sometimes grossly anthropomorphic”; (3) “with human passions of vindictiveness and hate” ; and we shall ask ourselves whether it is true that there is “a long distance” between the God of Sinai and the God of the Prophets. 1. It should be noted that it is only on the basis of a radical reconstruction of the literature of the Old Testament that any warrant can be found for the claim that the God of Israel was a tribal god in the sense that the gods of the neighboring peoples, Chemosh or Moloch, were such gods. In the first chapter of Genesis, He appears as the Creator of heaven and earth. Abraham is called to go forth from Ur of the Chaldees near the Persian Gulf ; the land of Canaan though occupied by other peoples with other gods is promised to him and to 26 Prolegomena (Eng. Trans.), p. vii. 27 A Pilgrimage to Palestine, p. 80. 28 Lewis Browne, This Believing World, p. 236.
[P000104] 102 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW his seed; and it is declared that in him all nations shall be blessed. In the wonders of Egypt and the Exodus, the God of Israel judges Pharaoh and all the gods of Egypt. Benhadad, king of Syria, is visited with a crushing defeat because he acts upon the assumption that Jehovah is a “god of the hills,” a local and limited deity, which is the tribal god idea in its essence. In describing Assyria as the rod of Jehovah’s anger, Isaiah is but following the example of Moses who declared that the Lord would “toy” (Ex. x. 2) with mighty Pharaoh. It is true that there are passages in the Old Testament which describe Israel as in an especial sense a chosen people and speak of Jehovah as their God. It is true that God “dwelt,” that He manifested Himself in a particular and unique way in the Tabernacle, and in the Temple. But these facts are not incompatible with omnipresence and omnipotence, as Solomon plainly recognized. For in his prayer at the dedication of the Temple he declared that he had surely built the Lord “a house to dwell in,” while at the same time confessing that the heavens could not “contain” Him. It does not make God a fetich to dwell in the heart of the individual Christian today; and just as little did it make Him a tribal god, to dwell in the tents of Israel. Those who make much of the doctrine of the divine immanence in present-day religious thought, should not make a travesty of it in the life of ancient Israel. 2. Dr. Snowden tells us that the God of the earlier period was “strongly and sometimes grossly anthropomorphic.” We would like to ask first of all whether Dr. Snowden objects to anthropomorphism as such, or simply to the form of anthropomorphism which he finds in what he regards the early characterizations of the God of Israel. If Dr. Snowden objects to the use of anthropomorphic language as such, we would suggest that he must eschew that familiar shibboleth of modem liberalism “the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man.” If he were to interpret the expression “the Fatherhood of God” with the same crass and brutal literalism with which the “modern” critic interprets much of the anthropomorphic
[P000105] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 103 language of the Old Testament, he would soon find that the difference between Old Testament and New Testament conceptions even as interpreted from the modernist standpoint is not as great as he alleges. Yet the very popularity of this phrase “the Fatherhood of God” is itself an illustration of the fact that, as Charles Hodge expresses it, anthropomorphism is “the fundamental principle of all religion .” 29 We are made in God’s image and “If we are like God, God is like us.” This principle, as he points out, can be and has been grossly abused. But without it God becomes a mere abstraction. If Dr. Snowden’s objection is not to anthropomorphism as such but only to “gross” forms of it, it is to be noted that the type to which he apparently objects is not limited to the preprophetic period. Dr. Powis Smith of the University of Chicago tells us: “That the Psalter was the hymn book of the Second Temple has long been recognized by scholars.” Writing of the idea of God in the Psalms, he says : He is credited with all the attributes of man. The psalmists carry their personification of God so far as not to shrink from assigning even human limitations to Him. Of course, personality itself is a limitation, but they go far beyond that. He shares some of the frailties of human personality, and is presented in a thoroughly anthropomorphic way. He has a face, with eyes, ears, nose, and mouth. He has arms, hands and feet. He breathes, swallows and talks. He grows weary and may take a nap. He becomes angry and executes vengeance upon the wicked; but his anger may quickly come and as quickly go. On one occasion, indeed, Moses actually turned back Yahweh’s wrath. Appeals are constantly made to his pride ; he must intervene in his people’s behalf for the sake of his own name, i.e., his reputation among men. He needs and is provided with a home; sometimes his dwelling place is in the heavens and again it is on earth, in the Temple at Jerusalem. He is credited with a great love of praise. This characteristic appears in the name of the Psalter which is “Praises.” It is shown by the great amount of praise that is expressed in the Psalms. . . . This weakness is made use of in a fine argumentative way by some of the psalmists. Yahweh is not thought of as being above considerations that effect his own advantage ; he is a God that may be reasoned with. Loving approbation as he does, he naturally will not wish to act in any way so as to diminish the volume of his praise. 30 29 Systematic Theology, Vol. I, 339. 30 The Religion of the Psalms, pp. I39ff. Dr. Smith adds about 75 Biblical references in footnotes. These we have omitted.
[P000106] 104 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW We have quoted from Dr. Powis Smith at such length primarily with a view to showing that the “hymn book of the Second Temple” is according to the critics of a piece with the pre-prophetic religion in its use of what Dr. Snowden calls “gross anthropomorphism.” Yet the Psalter is not merely “the hymn book of the Second Temple,” it is today the great treasure house of Christian devotion. If Dr. Smith and others of the critics were less concerned to vilify the God of Early Israel in the interests of a theory which maintains that the religion of Israel, like that of other nations, must have developed gradually out of that which is crude and base and vile, they would recognize that they are insisting in their interpretation of the figurative language of the Old Testament upon a literalism which surpasses in its crudity anything of which the most fanatical “fundamentalist” is guilty. We might say more upon this point, but since it is vitally related to the charge that the character of the God of the early Old Testament period is characterized by “human passions of vindictiveness and hate,” we shall pass on to it. 3. The third indictment of the God of Ancient Israel is the most serious of all. Not merely is it claimed that Jehovah is represented as a man ; it is asserted that He is not even a good man : He possesses the “human passions of vindictiveness and hate.” This view is well expressed by Loisy in the following words : The holiness of Yahweh consists in his inviolability and inaccessibility, in his power to make his will respected, but not in the moral perfection of his nature. His character, it has been said, shows a few moral qualities, but it is not precisely moral. His power, his knowledge, and above all his goodness, are limited. The God who is thought to have killed outright those who peeped into his ark, or who stretched out a hand to save it from tumbling, is not a judge who adjusts his punishment to the crime, but a terrific being whom one irritates by approaching too closely. The least infraction of his will, the slightest attack on the majesty of his name, drives him into a phrensy ; but he punishes or ignores such offenses according to his whim. 31 Such a conception of God, which must be regarded as a fearful misconception of the God whom the Christian wor- 31 Loisy, The Religion of Israel, p. 103.
[P000107] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST ? 105 ships is due, we are told, to the low standards of morality and religion which were held by the early Israelites; and it is argued that ... We must not for one moment believe, as many good people have tried to make themselves believe, that the Hebrew leaders always understood God’s will. How could God have revealed His entire character in an age of the most rudimentary morality? The Hebrews were often crude and vengeful and they endowed their God with the same attributes. They often did terrible things in His name. No one would go to Joshua or Judges to learn the nature of God or of true religion. Yet the conceptions of that age were a step and a necessary one in the moral progress of the world. 32 If the above quotations correctly represent the God of Israel as conceived of in the early period of the history of that ancient people, the question at once presents itself, and it is a very pressing one, When did this misconception cease? When was it superseded by a better and truer conception of God ? The critics would probably be unanimous in answering, With the great prophets of the eighth and seventh centuries b.c. “It is a long distance,” Dr. Snowden tells us, “from the God of Sinai and the wilderness and the times of the Judges to the God of Amos and Isaiah and the Exile.” Let us turn then to Amos and see how he portrays the Deity. The brief collection of his prophecies commences with a series of eight denunciations, each of which begins, “Thus saith the Lord.” In six of the eight, the denunciation proper, as distinguished from the preliminary indictment, begins with the words, “and I will send (or, kindle) fire.” The last of these denunciations, that pronounced against Israel, cites the destruction of the Amorites by Jehovah, a deed particularly execrated by the modernists, as an object lesson to the Israel of the prophet’s own day. The remnant of Israel which will remain after the Lord’s vengeance is accomplished is likened to “two legs or a piece of an ear” rescued from the mouth of a marauding lion. The denunciation reaches its height in the last chapter where we read : “Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I 32 Laura iE. Knott, Students’ Hist, of Hebrews, p. 83.
[P000108] io6 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW bring them down : and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence ; and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command a serpent, and he shall bite them : and though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay them : and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.” Certainly the God of Amos is very far from being a “pacifist” deity. Suppose then we turn to Hosea, Hosea who is often spoken of as the direct antithesis of Amos, Hosea who became, we are told, “the prophet of God’s inextinguishable love for His sinful people,” 33 who “anticipated by eight centuries the teaching of Jesus that love to God and love to man are essential to the formation of a perfect society,” 34 who “is perhaps nearer to Jesus in his teaching than is any other O.T. prophet.” 35 This “prophet of the divine love,” this “St. John of the Old Testament”—these and other similar titles are constantly applied to him—how does he describe Jehovah’s attitude toward Israel ? He tells us that He will be as a ravaging lion or an angry bear to Ephraim and Judah (v. 14, xiii. 8), he declares that they shall “reap the whirlwind” (viii. 7), he predicts that Egypt shall “gather” them and Memphis “bury” them (ix. 6), he asks for them “miscarrying womb and dry breasts” (ix. 14), he declares that they shall be “wanderers among the nation” (ix. 17), and that they shall call on the mountains to cover them and the hills to fall on them (x. 8). Finally, he declares that “Samaria shall become desolate for she hath rebelled against her God : they shall fall by the sword : their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up” (xiii. 16). This last statement is particularly noteworthy because, in proof of his charge that the God of Israel’s early history has the “human passions of vindictiveness and hate,” Dr. Snowden cites His “slaying ‘both man and woman, infant and suckling’ (1 Sam. xv. 3).” 38 Sanders, Old Testament Prophecy, p. 14. 34 Bailey & Kent, The Hebrew Commonwealth, p. 190. 35 New Standard Bible Dictionary, art on “Hosea” by Zenos, p. 362b.
[P000109] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 107 Yet we find Hosea, the prophet of the divine love, predicting that the God of Israel will do in the future to His disobedient children exactly what Dr. Snowden denounces the impossible God of Early Israel for commanding in the past. Nor is this severe portrayal of the God of Israel in the prophetic period confined to Amos and Hosea. Micah is regarded by many as having discovered and enunciated for all time the central principle of true religion: “He has shewed thee, O man, what is good ; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?” What is Micah’s word from his God for Samaria? “I will make Samaria as a heap of the field, and as plantings of a vineyard : and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley, and I will discover the foundations thereof.” And for Zion? “Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest.” And Isaiah? What has he to say? In the burden of Babylon we read, “Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes ; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. Behold I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver ; and as for gold they shall not delight in it. Their bows shall dash the young men to pieces ; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not spare children.” We might continue the quotation of passages indefinitely; but the above will suffice to show that the distinction which is constantly made, in fact it is one of the commonplaces of criticism, one of its assured results, between the “angry God” of the pre-prophetic period and the “God of love” of the prophets, is a grievous misrepresentation. The God of the prophets is fully as “angry” as the God of the earlier period. The “carrying away” of Israel and the “captivity” of Judah, with all their accompanying horrors, furnish convincing proof of this. It is to be noted further that the severe aspects of the God of the Bible do not cease even with the Old Testament. Some
[P000110] 108 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW of the most terrible words of denunciation are found in the New Testament and on the lips of the Saviour Himself. It was Jesus who said “Fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell,” who spoke of the “outer darkness” where there would be “weeping and gnashing of teeth,” and of the “fire that never shall be quenched: where their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched.” And it was on the way to Calvary that, in speaking of the fearful punishment which should be visited upon a rebellious people, Jesus quoted the words of Hosea’s prophecy, “Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us.” If love, or as we should prefer to say complacence, is the only divine attribute, if the God whom the man of today can worship must be a God of love and love only, then the critic must not content himself with rejecting the God of the pre-prophetic period in Israel. He must reject also the God of the prophets and of the New Testament. And finally he must reject the doctrine of Divine Providence or become a believer in a “finite god.” For as Orelli has well said: “Were God indeed incapable of the deepest emotions of love, He would be poorer than man; and were He incapable of wrath, the events of history could not be traced back to Him .” 36 The answer of the critics to the contention that the God of the prophetic period in Israel’s history shows the same stern and severe aspects as does the God of the earlier period will be, of course, that there is a vital and essential difference which must not be overlooked. The God of the early period is vengeful, capricious and biased, a non-moral and indeed an immoral being; the God of the prophets is supremely ethical, a just and righteous God, who will not spare even His own people when they sin against His holy will. We are told that it was by the very tragedy through which God’s people passed at the hands of the great world-powers Assyria and Babylon that the prophets learned that God was not the mere god of a tribe, bound to protect his children whether they were right or wrong, because he was their god, but the God of all the 30 The Twelve Minor Prophets, p. 61.
[P000111] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST ? 109 earth, the ruler of all nations, who demands of all alike righteous obedience to His just and holy will. In view of this contention that the God of the prophets, as distinct from the “god” of the earlier period, was a just and righteous God, we would call attention to a statement which appears in the Book of Genesis, a statement made to Abraham in explanation of the failure of God to give to him during his own life-time the land which He promised to his seed. The statement is this : “For the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.” What is meant by this phrase? The spade of the archaeologist has made us more intimately acquainted with the religious practices of the ancient inhabitants of Palestine and the neighboring regions than was formerly the case. As a result of these discoveries, discoveries which only serve to confirm the express statements of the Old Testament records, a distinguished German critic tells us that the religion of the Canaanites was characterized by “religious obscenity and infant sacrifice .” 37 It would seem then that the inspired writers spoke advisedly when they referred to the iniquities of the Amorites and the abominations which they practiced in the worship of their gods. It would seem that the attitude of the God of Ancient Israel toward such customs and those who practised them may justly be called righteous indignation. Yet we are being told today that such a characterization is unjust to these ancient peoples. A recent writer speaks as follows : “The iniquity of the Amorites” is a recurrent phrase ; but we should be careful of the sense to be attached to the expression. There is an implication of moral turpitude, of a deliberate choice of evil, in our use of the word “iniquity,” which it would be inexact to emphasize in this particular connection. Doubtless the rites of the High Places would appeal to an individual morally warped. Doubtless they would have a subtly deteriorating effect on the morals of the community at large; the licence which they encouraged, and on occasion even enjoined, would in itself be destructive of personal self-control. But it would be a grave mistake to imagine that they had been deliberately contrived in order to satisfy the lower cravings. They had come into being when the ancestors of the Semites were on the level of savages .38 87 Cornill, The Culture of Ancient Israel, p. 10. 98 Macalester, A Century of Excavation in Palestine, p. 277.
[P000112] no THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW The above statement throws a very significant light upon the claim of the modernist that there is an essential difference between the “righteous God” of the Prophets and the “angry god” of early Israel. It shows us plainly that the anger of this so-called tribal God was directed in the early period as in the later against sin. It shows that the practices of the heathen against which the prophets launched their thunder-bolts were known in the days of the patriarchs and Moses just as in later times. Only, and here is the important point, it denies to them in the one period that ethical quality which it so strongly stresses in the other. It condones them as primitive in the days of Joshua: it condemns them as wicked in the days of Amos. Not merely this, it asserts that these primitive rites were practised, with impunity and even with a certain “evolutionary” propriety, by the invading Israelites as by the invaded Amorites. And it does this on the authority of a reconstruction of the religion of Early Israel based on comparative religion and evolution which is directly opposed to the contention of the Old Testament that Israel was called and set apart to be a holy people. The 24,000 who perished at Shittim are mute but eloquent witnesses to the fact that Israel was to be a peculiar people. Yet Dr. Barton in declaring that religious prostitution “was known in Israel as among the other nations, and was not eradicated until the reform of Josiah in 621 B.c.,” 39 fails to point out the all-important fact that this institution was expressly forbidden in the law of Moses. On the contrary, it is clear that he regards it as an inevitable feature in the primitive religion of Israel. On this wise the God of Israel as worshipped in the days of Joshua is made into an immoral or primitive deity and his anger becomes mere capriciousness and vindictiveness. For His decree of extermination is directed not against a civilization steeped in sin but against a people as good or better than His own. But when the Bible itself is allowed to speak, neither in the case of the anger of God nor of His righteousness, is 39 The Religion of Israel, pp. 7f.
[P000113] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? Ill there in the Old Testament any essential difference between the pre-prophetic and the prophetic periods. The Pentateuch declares the God of Moses to be a holy God. It is only by radically reconstructing the history along the lines of naturalistic evolution that this Holy God who cannot look upon sin is changed into a being who is both immoral and cruel. The same applies to the love of God. We have seen that Hosea contains the most amazing expressions of the severity and the love of God. Were the critics to partition Hosea as they partition Moses, they could find in Hosea an angry god as terrible as their god of Early Israel. But it suits their purpose to regard Hosea as the Old Testament apostle of love. Yet at Horeb the Lord revealed Himself to Moses as plainly as later to Hosea as a righteous and loving God: “And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty ; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children’s children, unto the third and to the fourth generation” (Ex. xxxiv. 6-7). 40 And Jesus turns to the “law” which he frequently describes as Mosaic, 41 for the “first and great commandment” which is “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and with all thy mind” (Deut. vi. 5). Yet the modernists insist on representing Him as an angry god whose anger was mere caprice and vindictiveness. Consequently the question with which we are ultimately confronted is this. If there was so vast a difference between 40 This passage is assigned by Driver to JE and consequently represents an early tradition regarding the Mosaic period. It is from this chapter that the so-called Decalogue of J, referred to above, is carved. 41 'Cf. Mt. xix. 7, 8, xxiii. 2; Mk. x. 3 ; Lk. xvi. 29, 30, xxiv. 27; Jn. v. 45, 46, vii. 19, 23. These passages are perfectly consistent with the view that the Pentateuch is Mosaic. On the other hand, it is noteworthy that Ezra to whom the critics assign so important a part in the completion of their “so-called” Law of Moses is never once mentioned in the New Testament.
[P000114] 1 12 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW the God of the prophets and the God of Early Israel as the critics allege, would Jesus have referred so confidently to Him as the “God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob?” If the god of the patriarchs was a mere tribal god, like Moloch or Chemosh, would Jesus have said in speaking of this god, as Luke tells us that He did, “for all live unto Him.” If the god of the patriarchs was “strongly and grossly anthropomorphic,” would not Jesus who taught that “God is a spirit” have preferred to refer to one less “clothed upon with clouds of human limitations and imperfections” than this god of the patriarchs ? If the fair fame of the god of the patriarchs was sullied by the “human passions of vindictiveness and hate,” would not He who declared that God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son for its redemption have thought with abhorrence of Ancient Israel’s “angry god” ? Believe it who may. For ourselves we cannot but see in Jesus’ confident appeal to the “God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob” as well as in other and similar references to the Old Testament conclusive proof that this difference between the religion of the Israel in the early and later periods of which the critics make so much is a “modern” discovery which the teachings of Jesus emphatically repudiate. Jonah The view which is generally accepted by “modern” interpreters of the Old Testament is that the Book of Jonah is an allegory, a parable, a satire, a quaint old story, a wonderful sermon, a prophetic story, a missionary tract, which was written about three to five centuries after the time of the historical Jonah. “The real design of the narrative,” Driver tells us, “is to teach, in opposition to the narrow, exclusive view, which was too apt to be popular with the Jews, that God’s purposes of grace are not limited to Israel alone, but that they are open to the heathen as well, if only they abandon their sinful courses, and turn to Him in true penitence.” 42 That Jonah should be made the central figure in such an allegory is 42 Driver, Introduction, p. 323.
[P000115] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 113 explained as due to his anti-Assyrian prejudices. Thus, Zenos holds that “the Book of Jonah was produced as a protest against the extreme form of Jewish nationalism in the latter half of the fourth century b.c., that in literary form it is an imaginative work with a moral lesson, and that the ancient prophet is chosen as its hero for his known anti-Assyrian bias .” 48 “Unlike the other prophetic books,” says Cooke, “Jonah delivers his prophecy in the form of a story. Of course the story is not to be taken as literal history ; yet it is historical in the sense in which the parable of the Good Samaritan, its New Testament counterpart, may be called historical .” 44 So interpreted the Book of Jonah is regarded by “modern” scholars as of immense importance. “The book of Jonah,” Fowler tells us, “seems to be an allegory in which Jonah is Israel, the whale Babylon, and the great thought of the whole is that God cares for all peoples even the most wicked, and that he desires his people to share his purposes of mercy to all mankind. Viewed thus, instead of being a narrative of ancient wonders hard to believe or a mere silly story, the book becomes the vehicle for conveying a truth that lies above the level of almost all the rest of the Old Testament. It is the forerunner of Jesus’ wonderful parables of the Good Samaritan and the Prodigal Son, with their lessons of a compassionate God and a broad and generous humanity.” 45 It is described by Sellin as “one of the most precious jewels of Hebrew literature” and declared to be inspired by “a truly prophetic spirit”. 46 It is, to quote again from Cooke, a prophetic voice "raised on behalf of the large theology which Israel’s creed implied”; 47 and he adds “No wonder that our Lord found the book congenial to His teaching.” It is his opinion that “Among the inspired utterances of Israel’s religion, the book 4a New Standard Dictionary, art. “Jonah,” p. 477b. 44 In A New Commentary on Holy Scripture, ed. by Bishop Gore ; Part I, p. 580. 48 Great Leaders of Heb. Hist., p. 186. 48 Sellin, Introduction, p. 174. 47 Op. cit., in loco.
[P000116] 1 14 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW takes rank with Is. liii, Jer. xxxi. 31-34, Ps. lxxiii, and comes as near to Christianity as anything in the Old Testament.” In fact Cornill apparently even finds in it a rebuke to the narrowness of Jesus’ own teachings. For in speaking of it as “a protest against the pernicious arrogance of the Judaism that followed Ezra,” he remarks : “In this the greatness of the Book of Jonah lies for all time, and also its unique significance in the Old Testament, to which a tribute of the highest admiration can only be rendered, when one recalls Mt. x. 5-6, xv. 24-26.” 48 Since in the verses referred to Jesus forbids the Twelve to go to the “Gentiles” and “Samaritans” and declares that He Himself is not sent but “unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel,” it is clear that in this comment Cornill is commending Jonah at the expense of the Lord Himself. In this “modern” view the miraculous elements of the story are quite positively rejected. Thus Gunkel assures us, in speaking of the Old Testament narratives, that “A modern reader smiles when he finds it recorded as an historical fact that a she-ass opened its mouth and spoke, or that a man spent three days in the belly of a great fish and thereafter emerged alive, or that the first human beings lived for centuries.” 49 According to Sellin, it may be true that Jonah went to Nineveh : “But this historical kernel has been elaborated in legendary fashion, on the one side by way of parallel to the story of Elijah under the juniper bush in 1 Kings xix, and on the other has been brought into connection with a folk-tale, based on a mythological foundation, which is found among many nations in different parts of the world—Indians, Egyptians and others.” 50 Moulton believes that the story of the great fish is the result of the mistaken attempt of a commentator to explain the words “out of the belly of hell cried I,” maintaining that “the trouble from which the singer has been delivered is, in the plainest language, described as an immersion in the sea.” “Thus,” he concludes, “the question is not, 48 Introduction, p. 338. 49 What Remains of the Old Testament, p. 15. 50 Op. cit., p. 173.
[P000117] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 115 as is commonly supposed, whether the incident of the whale is a real or a mythical incident. The question is, whether it is a part of the Bible at all ; and the suggestion is that it is an addition of a commentator, and, moreover, an addition that is in manifest contradiction to the sacred text .” 51 The above quotations will suffice to make it clear that according to the “modern” view the whole point of the book of Jonah lies in its being a protest against the nationalism and exclusivism of the later Jews, a distinctly missionary and universalistic pronouncement ; and not at all in the marvelous experiences of Jonah which are to be regarded as myth, legend, or fiction. How is it regarded in the New Testament? Let us consider this question first negatively, then positively. In view of the great importance attached by the critics to the Book of Jonah as a missionary utterance, it is significant that neither Jesus nor any of the apostles uses it in this way. How effective a reference to Jonah’s preaching to the myriad population of mighty Nineveh would have been as an introduction to Jesus’ proclamation of the gospel ! Yet in His first pronouncement to the people of His native village, Nazareth, He referred instead to Elijah’s sojourn at Sarepta and Elisha’s cleansing of Naaman. What would have been more appropriate than that Jesus, in declaring to Nicodemus the universality of the Gospel, that it extended to “whosoever believeth,” should have appealed to Jonah and pointed out that His words were but the fulfilment of this great prophetic utterance? Is it not remarkable that Peter should have required a special supernatural vision to prepare him to obey the call of Cornelius, if the Book of Jonah proclaimed the rights of the Gentiles so clearly and conclusively? Is it not strange that Paul, the apostle to the Gentiles, should make not the slightest reference or appeal to Jonah in justification of his missionary labors? The discovery that Jonah was a great missionary pronouncement is a distinctly modern one. Turning now to consider the passages in the Gospels where 61 The Modern Reader’s Bible for Schools: Old Testament, p. 260.
[P000118] ii6 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW Jonah is referred to (Mt. xii. 39-41, Lk. xi. 29-32; cf. Mt. xvi. 4), we notice first that in no one of them is the status of the Gentile world the subject of discussion. The occasion is not a debate concerning the scope of the message, but the authority of the messenger. Jesus is asked for a “sign” (at]/j,elov). What is meant by this seems quite obvious. The scribes and Pharisees were demanding some extraordinary token which would accredit Jesus. In reply Jesus tells them that there shall be no sign given them, but “the sign of the prophet Jonas” ; and that there may be no uncertainty as to His exact meaning He adds, so the narrative in Matthew expressly tells us: “For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly ; so shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.” That is to say, it is the unique personal experience of Jonah, the “fish story” as it is derisively called, which Jesus cites when He refers most particularly to this book. It is to be noted, furthermore, that to all appearances Jesus refers to this episode as fact, as a historical event which He describes as a type of a still more important event which He foretells: “As Jonas was ... so shall the Son of man be. . . . ” That Jesus in response to their demand for a “sign” should refer to this remarkable and unique Old Testament wonder was eminently appropriate. It was just the kind of sign for which His hearers were asking, an event involving the marvelous in a most extraordinary form; and the similarity between the event cited and the event predicted is obvious. That He would have cited as a type of the greatest of His signs—His death and resurrection—a mere legendary embellishment of a great prophetic utterance intended to teach a very different lesson, is quite out of the question. Consequently, those who would adopt this interpretation of Jonah are inclined to treat this verse (vs. 40) as an interpolation and if possible prove it an awkward interpolation since there is no evidence that the text is corrupt. That there is sufficient internal warrant for rejecting it is apparently often assumed to be the case. Thus Cooke tells us: “The ‘sign of
[P000119] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? II 7 Jonah’ (Lk. xi. 29, 30) was the appearance of a Hebrew prophet in a stronghold of heathenism,” ignoring completely the express statement of Mt. xii. 40. 52 And Zenos tells us : “Jesus fixed on this [the missionary motive] as the central theme of the book, and used it as a means toward arousing greater zeal for the Kingdom of God among the Jews of His own day. In a word, the lesson of the Book of Jonah is analogous to the foreign mission idea of developed Christianity.” 83 These statements sound very definite and confident. But when we turn to the New Testament narratives we fail to find any real warrant for them. The application of the Jonah incident as given by Mt. and Lk. states expressly that “as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this generation.” In what sense was Jesus a sign to that generation ? The natural and obvious answer is, In His death and resurrection on the third day. Jesus never went as a foreign missionary, He did not go to Rome or Athens to call men to repentance ; He did die and rise the third day, and in so doing He fulfilled the sign of Jonah. We are also told that the Ninevites who repented at the preaching of Jonah and the Queen of Sheba who travelled far to hear the wisdom of Solomon will “rise up in judgment against this generation,” because “a greater than Jonas is here” and they have rejected Him and His message. It is argued that the words “the preaching of Jonas” favor the 52 Gore's New Commentary, Part I, p. 580. With this agrees the interpretation of Mt. xii. 39f., as given in this commentary (Part III, p. 159). There the “sign of Jonah” is said to mean that “as Jonah preached repentance to the Gentiles with success, so a time will come when the Gentiles will hear and accept the Gospel while Israel will reject it.” As to vs. 40 we are told, “This verse, peculiar to Matthew, probably gives the interpretation of our Lord’s words current in the Palestinian Church, and accepted by the evangelist himself. Indeed it may be true to the mind of the Lord. . . It is noteworthy that while it is here admitted that vs. 40, which narrates the “fish story,” may be true to the mind of Jesus, any reference to the fish is studiously avoided. It seems clear that even if the “modern” critic feels obliged to admit that the Lord may have believed the “fish story,” the best that he can do is simply to ignore it. 88 Op. cit.
[P000120] n8 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW “modern” interpretation. Two points are to be noted. All that we know about Jonah’s preaching to the Ninevites is that it was a message of woe and vengeance. In Jonah i. 2 we read : “Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me.” When the word came a second time to Jonah it was this: “Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee.” In response to this command Jonah went to Nineveh; and this is the sermon which he preached, “Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed.” That is all we know about it. That Jonah would have emphasized this “preaching” by telling the story of his wonderful escape from death, seems highly probable. Such a story would have made a profound impression on the Ninevites. That he did so we cannot assert positively. What we do know is that this preaching was so effective that the city repented and was spared. We are told that this grieved Jonah exceedingly and that the Lord rebuked him for his lack of compassion. That Jonah told the Ninevites of God’s love is nowhere stated. If Jonah is a missionary tract, it is one for the Jews, not for the Ninevites. According to the critics it is intended for the Jews of an age centuries after Nineveh ceased to exist. Whether Jonah ever went to Nineveh they neither know nor do they greatly care. Consequently they regard the reference to the Ninevites as simply an appeal to an incident in a familiar story. Jonah was not really a sign to the Ninevites : the Book of Jonah was a sign to the narrow Judaism of the post-captivity period. It is hard to see how even the most ardent advocate of foreign missions can see in Jesus’ use of Jonah an attempt to arouse “greater zeal for the Kingdom of God among the Jews of His own day.” The refrain “a greater than Jonas is here” makes this plain. The Scribes and Pharisees are not rebuked for their lack of missionary zeal, but for their rejection of Him. And the sign which He promises them shows that He is thinking primarily of His death and resurrection. In the treatment of the story of Jonah by the “modern”
[P000121] WAS JESUS A MODERNIST? 119 critics we have an excellent illustration of the extremes to which these scholars are willing to go in claiming Jesus as a “modernist.” In spite of the context which shows clearly that Jesus’ reference to Jonah was in reply to a demand for a sign which would accredit Him, in spite of His definite reference to the “great fish” and the “three days” spent by Jonah in its belly, in spite of the statement that the Ninevites who repented at Jonah’s preaching will rise to condemn “this generation” for their failure to accept a greater than Jonah, in spite of these things we are told that Jonah is a missionary sermon addressed to the Jews of the times of Ezra or later, and that Jesus used it for the purpose of “arousing greater zeal for the Kingdom of God among the Jews of His own day.” Dr. Snowden tells us that “there are modernists who do reject the supernatural in all its forms.” But he maintains that “this is the result of their application of the principle of modernism and not the principle itself.” Whether or not the distinction drawn by Dr. Snowden is a valid one or not, the fact remains that this is the usual and the most characteristic application of the principle. The rejection of the supernatural both in word and act, the substitution of a more or less consistently naturalistic and uniformitarian theory of evolution for the pervasive supernaturalism of the Bible is its dominant characteristic. The modernizing of the story of Jonah shows this clearly. In the case of Jonah it means desupernaturalizing, no more and no less. We might go on to cite other instances of the efforts of the critics to prove that Jesus was a modernist. It is not necessary. That Jesus held the view of the Old Testament which is traditional in the Christian church, must be admitted we think by any one who will carefully consider the evidence. Princeton. Oswald T. Allis.
[P000122] WILLIAM BRENTON GREENE, JR. William Brenton Greene, Jr., was born at Providence, Rhode Island, August 16, 1854. He came of early New England stock, being a direct descendant of Colonial Governor Jahleel Brenton and a great-great-nephew of General Nathanael Greene. He was graduated from Princeton College in 1876 with first honors, being valedictorian of his class. After a year spent in teaching he entered Princeton Theological Seminary; and at the completion of his theological course, he was ordained by the Presbytery of Boston, June 3, 1880. On September 2nd of that year he married Miss Katharine Porter Greene of East Greenwich, Connecticut. The first twelve years of Dr. Greene’s ministry were spent in the pastorate. He was called to the First Presbyterian Church of Boston in 1880. Three years later he accepted a call to the Tenth Presbyterian Church of Philadelphia, where he succeeded Dr. John DeWitt, with whom he was later to be associated at Princeton. In the same year he was elected a director of Princeton Theological Seminary. In 1885 he became a member of the Board of Publication and Sabbath School Work of the Presbyterian Church, U.S.A. ; and served as chairman of its Publication Committee for about a quarter of a century. In 1891 he received the degree of D.D. from his Alma Mater. The last thirty-six years of Dr. Greene’s ministry were spent in theological education. In 1892 he was called to the Stuart Professorship of the Relations of Philosophy and Science to the Christian Religion in Princeton Theological Seminary (the name of the chair was changed in 1903 to Stuart Professorship of Apologetics and Christian Ethics) ; and he continued to occupy this chair until the time of his death. Dr. Greene contributed many articles to the religious press, especially to The Presbyterian and Reformed Review and its successor The Princeton Theological Review ; and served for
[P000123] WILLIAM BRENTON GREENE, JR. 121 fifteen years (1903-1917) on the Editorial Committee of the latter. He was the author of a brief Compendium of Christian Doctrine (1905). Acquiescing in his wish that there should be no memorial service, the Faculty adopted the following minute: “In the death of its senior professor, Reverend William Brenton Greene, Jr., D.D., on November 16th, 1928, Princeton Seminary has suffered a great loss. For more than a third of a century Dr. Greene occupied the Stuart Professorship, and rendered eminent service to the institution and to the Church at large. His keenly analytical mind and scholarly attainments, his devotion to duty and loyalty to the truth, his wisdom in counsel and the beautiful courtesy and kindliness which marked his bearing, will long be remembered by all who knew him. His death has brought to the members of the Faculty a deep sense of personal loss. Having served his day and generation in the fear of God, he now rests from his labors and his works do follow him.”
[P000124] REVIEWS OF RECENT LITERATURE APOLOGETICAL THEOLOGY Through Science to God. By Charles H. Tyndall, D.D., Ph.D., author of “Electricity and Its Similitudes.” Fleming H. Revell Company. This book is somewhat of “a summary of more than thirty-five years of contemplation, study and investigation of the works of nature.” Most of the material was presented by the author in a series of lectures delivered throughout the country, which had for their aim the proving that the facts of science, rightly interpreted, lead irresistibly to God as the author and the sustainer of the universe. The book is a perfect treasure-house of interesting facts and discoveries from physics, chemistry, astronomy and biology, and the way in which these interesting facts are analyzed, correlated and shown to be the expression of the activity of a personal God, is admirable. Part I deals with nature as a medium in revealing spiritual truth, and shows the influence of nature upon man mentally and spiritually, pointing out the fact that this influence is not the result of chance but of purpose. Many beautiful analogies are shown between the facts of nature and the teachings of Scripture. Part II deals with wireless telegraphy, the radio ; invisible light ; inaudible sounds, and telepathy. The universality of waves in nature, and the necessity of being in tune with the waves in order to receive them, is clearly pointed out. The analogy with the things of the spirit is plain. Unless we are in harmony with God, our souls do not respond to His truth. “God sings, over our imprisoned spirits, His note of exquisite harmony and sympathy, and when at last our dormant capacity is quickened into response, and we sing His song along with Him, our whole nature is vibrant with the harmony of heaven” (p. 166). Part III deals with radioactivity, and the analogy between radium which is constantly sending forth energy, and “the Father of lights, with whom can be no variation, neither shadow that is cast by turning,” is beautifully brought out. The striking correspondence between the trinity of science and the Trinity of Scripture, the Triune God, is clearly and forcefully shown. Ether, pervading all things, and in which all things have their being, is the symbol of the Infinite Father. Matter, which we can see, and feel and handle, and yet whose nature is a profound mystery, is ether manifested, or incarnated, and is the symbol of the Eternal Son of God. Energy reveals matter, and yet is the expression of the everpresent ether. Needless to say it is the symbol of the Holy Spirit. Thus the trinity of nature is seen to symbolize the Triune God. The book is such an excellent one, and one which can be recommended so unqualifiedly that one hesitates to point out any flaws in its excellence.
[P000125] RECENT LITERATURE 123 While evolution is not taught in the book, one gains the impression that the author accepts it from a quotation such as that from Hugh Miller, which is quoted on p. 48 with approval. One is inclined to wish that the author had used more discrimination in accepting as true such things as telepathy (p. 29), about which there is certainly too little evidence to draw certain conclusions. “A malarious atmosphere poisons the blood, deranges the functions of the body, particularly the liver” (p. 31), is a statement which has no place in a book of science, since malaria is a germ disease, produced by the bites of mosquitoes, and not by a peculiar atmosphere. While the present writer has too little knowledge of physics, chemistry and astronomy to check up all the facts cited in such profusion throughout the book, they certainly make a remarkable impression upon the reader, and as the author says : ‘‘We are to permit each room through an open door to lead us at last to the throne-room, and into the presence of the King—the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God our Saviour” (p. 15). This book should perform an excellent service in pointing out the unity between the two great books of God, nature and the Bible. It is to be hoped that it will have a wide circulation and do much to win back to the faith those whose faith has been shaken by anti-Christian attacks of pseudo scientists. Ministers should find this book a mine of illustrations for sermons. Pyengyang, Korea. Floyd E. Hamilton. The Theory of Evolution Applied to Man. An Inquiry: From a Lawyer’s Point of View. For Private Circulation. Chicago : The Lakeside Press. 1928. This is an exceptionally interesting little book, because it shows the weakness of a phase of the theory of evolution when tested by the evidential method of the law courts. The evolutionists are constantly claiming that the evidence for the theory is so strong that it should convince anyone but an ignoramus or a prejudiced bigot. The author of this book, who remains anonymous, examines the evidence presented by the latest writers on the evolution of man, and gives it the same tests that any evidence must undergo in a law court before it can be accepted as evidence. He takes only the statements which the evolutionists themselves make, quoting profusely from the leading authors, and shows that when we take only the evidence of the plaintiff, it is still far from establishing the truth of the theory as applied to man, and that on the basis of the evidence which the evolutionists present their whole case collapses. The author makes no attempt to analyze or reply to the evidence for the general theory of evolution, and he accepts at its face value, for the sake of argument, the claim of the evolutionists that there has been a succession of geological ages in the past, marked by the progressive evolution. On the basis of that assumption, he then proceeds to show that the evidence of the evolutionists in no way proves that man is included in the process of evolution, that, on the contrary, the sudden appearance of the “Cro- Magnon” race, long after the complete disappearance of the Neanderthal
[P000126] 124 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW race, which the evidence seems to show was hardly a human race (even on the evolutionist’s own evidence), coincides with the doctrine of creation taught in the Book of Genesis, better than with the view of the evolutionist. The author seems to have made good his claim that the evolutionist’s own evidence in no way proves that man is included in the chain of evolution, even if evolution be admitted for the rest of organic life, and that the evidence which they present itself is better harmonized with the view of creation than with the view of evolution. The book is particularly valuable in that it shows the unfounded assumptions, the breaks in the evidence, and the non sequitur arguments used so constantly by the evolutionists, when only a small portion of the field of evolution is examined. While the author has presented a logical case against any claims of the evolutionists that the evidence proves that man is included in the chain of evolution, I fear that the book will not convince evolutionists of the error of their ways. If the successive age theory is true and if there is conclusive evidence that life outside of man has evolved, the inference would seem inevitable that man, at least on the physical side, is included in the chain of evolution, even were all proof of the fact itself lacking. The author has done good service in pointing out the vulnerability of the evidence for human evolution, but the argument against human evolution needs to be supplemented by the evidence against organic evolution as such, before the case of the evolutionists can be overthrown. Pyengyang, Korea. Floyd E. Hamilton. EXEGETICAL THEOLOGY The Authentic Literature of Israel. Freed from the Disarrangements, Expansions and Comments of Early Native Editors. Edited with Introductions. By Elizabeth Czarnomska, A.M., Professor of Biblical and Comparative Literature in Sweet Briar College, Virginia; formerly Professor of English Literature in Smith College, Mass. ; later, of Hebrew Language and Literature in the University of Cincinnati, Ohio ; Honorary Secretary of the Egypt Exploration Society. Part Two: “From the Exile to the Recovery of Israel’s Independence.” New York: The Macmillan Company. 1928. Pp. xxxi, 553. This volume completes the attempt of Professor Czarnomska to “free” the contents of the Old Testament from the “disarrangements, expansions and comments of early native editors.” Since the first volume (1924) was noticed at some length in this Review (Vol. XXIV, pp. 501 ff.) it might be sufficient merely to state that the defects which marked the one —inaccuracy and inadequacy of statement, representation of conjecture as fact, and anti-supernaturalism—are characteristic of the other also. But the fact that these two elaborate volumes, which are issued by one of our best-known international publishing houses, are being heralded
[P000127] RECENT LITERATURE 125 as a notable feat of constructive scholarship, 1 makes it advisable to call attention once more to these defects, especially as they appear in the new volume. As an illustration of inaccuracy and inadequacy of statement, we turn first to “The Poems of Isaiah II” (pp. 76 ff.) where we have a rearrangement of Isa. xl-xlviii, a group of poems assigned to “c. 536 b.c.” The second of these poems is entitled “A Proclamation of the Omnipotence of Yahweh”; and it is said to be composed of the following verses: “Ch. xl. 6-8, 13-19; xli. 6-7; xl. 20-21 b.” This brief summary contains two positive errors : instead of “13-19,” it should read “12-19,” and in place of “20-21 b” it should be “20-3 ib.” In other words this rearrangement contains eleven more verses than are indicated in the heading. Furthermore since the summary states that this poem ends with “21b” (i.e., 31b) and a glance at the text shows that the words “they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint” are omitted, the reader is entitled to assume that where no reference is made to the divisions of a verse the whole verse is to be found in the text of the poem. Thus, he would expect that the following stanza is made up of all of xl. 18-19, xli. 6-7 ; xl. 20; in other words that it is merely a rearrangement: To whom then will ye liken God? And what sort of likeness will ye place beside Him? An image? A craftsman casteth it, and a goldsmith overlayeth it with gold. One helpeth the other, and saith to his fellow: Be of good courage ! The carpenter encourageth the goldsmith, And he that smootheth with the hammer, him that smiteth the anvil, Saying of the soldering: It is good. He hath chosen a tree that will not rot; he fasteneth it with nails So that it shall not totter. But he will find on examination that (1) “and forgeth silver chains” (xl. 19 end) is omitted; (2) nothing of xl. 20 is used except the phrase “he hath chosen a tree that will not rot,” and this is inserted in xli. 7 before the words “he fasteneth it with nails so that it shall not totter.” It seems to us obvious that, however firmly persuaded the editor may be that the rearrangement proposed is correct, it is both incorrect and misleading to state in the summary of contents that xl. 20 is included in this poem, when in fact only four words out of fourteen (in the Hebrew) actually appear in it. An even worse example of inaccuracy of statement is the second poem of “Isaiah IV,” (pp. 262 ff.) which is dated by the author about 430 b.c. It is entitled “The Gracious Message of Yahweh to His People.” It is said to be composed of “Isa. lxi. 1-9; lxii. 5-12.” It actually contains : lxi. 1-9, 11 ; lxii. 1, 2 (most), 4 (most), 3, 4 (rest), 5-12. In other words about 1 A folder issued by the publishers giving “Opinions of the Press” quotes among others The Presbyterian Banner and The Christian Register; also such theological radicals as Professor Fagnani of Union Seminary, Professor Irving F. Wood of Smith College and John Haynes Holmes of the Community Church, New York City.
[P000128] 126 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW 5 of the 22 verses of which it is composed, are not mentioned at all. And nothing is said of changes of order or alterations of the text. Again, Josh, ix is distributed between four sources J, E, D2 and P. The first two are given in Vol. I (cf. pp. 8o, 199) ; the last two in Vol. II (cf. pp. 272, 536). The analysis is given with the same inaccuracy which we have noted elsewhere. Thus vss. 7 and 14 are printed in the J source, although the summary assigns them to E (vss. “6-9a, Ii-i5a” belong to E [cf. Vol. I, p. 197] ; but “i2-i3a” are stated on p. 76 to belong to J and 14 and part of 15 are printed with J without being mentioned in the analysis [Vol. I, p. 76]). Vs. 15 is especially noteworthy. It reads in the AV as follows : “And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them to let them live ; and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.” Although one of the shortest verses in the chapter (it has only 12 words in the Hebrew), it is divided between 3 sources. To E is assigned the first clause, “And Joshua made peace with them” (cf. Vol. I, p. 199; on p. 197 called “15a”). The second clause, “and made a league with them to let them live,” is inserted in the text of J (Vol. I, p. 80, the verb being changed to plural), although it is not mentioned in the summary (p. 76). The third clause, “and the princes of the congregation sware unto them,” is assigned to P (Vol. II, p. 586). This is sufficiently complicated. But it is rendered still more so by inaccuracy of statement on the part of the editor. For the P source as given by Professor Czarnomska reads as follows: “And Joshua covenanted with them to let them live, and the princes of the congregation sware unto them,” which gives to P the part of the verse that has been already assigned to J (the “Joshua” being borrowed from E). Either this clause has been inserted in the J passage by accident, which might be inferred from the absence of any mention of vs. 15 in the J summary; or else its inclusion in P is a mistake. Against this latter explanation speaks, if we mistake not, the tendency of the critics to limit the P clause to the words : “and the princes of the congregation sware unto them” (vss. 15b). Again, the first “division” of Ezekiel (Chaps, i-xxiv) has seven “subdivisions,” the first of which is entitled “The First Vision of Ezekiel, His Call to the Prophetic Office.” It is said to contain “Ch. i. i-iii. 15.” The first paragraph of the text begins with the words “Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year.” At the word “year” a footnote is added which reads as follows : “There are no means of determining the epoch from which Ezekiel dates ; but it is assumed from some slight indications that he was thirty years old at the time of his first vision.” This statement will be surprising to anyone who recalls that in the verses which immediately follow (vss. 2-3), the statement appears: “In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin’s captivity, the word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the Lord was there upon him.” The surprise will be increased when he reads on in the text furnished by Miss Czarnomska, for he will find that these two verses are not contained in it. Why is this? Apparently because
[P000129] RECENT LITERATURE 127 Miss Czarnomska regards the dating in vss. 2-3 as undependable. Yet this is far from representing the consensus of scholarship. For, Cornill—to mention only a single scholar, yet one who made a special study of the text of Ezekiel—apparently regards it as reliable (cf. his Introduction, p. 314). But even if it were the accepted view that vss. 2-3 are a “gloss,” is it not seriously misleading to state in the heading that this subdivision contains “i. i-iii. 15,” then to omit these verses from the first paragraph without indicating the omission in any way, and finally to assert in a footnote that “there are no means of determining the epoch from which Ezekiel dates”? It would be hard, we think, to find a better example of what is called “doctoring the evidence.” It is a method which in business and politics is not regarded as ethical; but it is so generally employed by the “critics” that they seem to forget that any ethical principle is involved. We have lighted upon the passages just cited somewhat at random. How many others there are like them we cannot say. Clearly in respect to accuracy and adequacy of statement the second volume is no improvement on the first. In this connection it may be remarked that the absence of an index complicates matters very greatly, and makes it difficult for the reader to locate passages under the rearrangement. Aside from occasional cross-references the reader is dependent upon the brief table of contents given at the beginning of each volume. One who is familiar with the general conclusions of the more radical critics will know as a rule where to look for missing fragments—“clippings” they are called on the paper wrapper—of familiar chapters. But the general reader is likely to be hopelessly at sea. Thus, the arranging of Jeremiah in “booklets” with “appendices” involves so many changes of order that the average reader will probably suppose that the six booklets and two appendices given in Vol. I (pp. 343-398) constitute a recasting of the whole of Jeremiah. If so he will be surprised to find a seventh “booklet” (this booklet, dated “c. 312,” includes the Story of the Rechabites which Principal George Adam Smith [Jeremiah, p. 193] speaks of as “probably dictated by Jeremiah to Baruch”) given in Vol. II (pp. 395-408). The second volume like the first illustrates the positiveness with which Professor Czarnomska makes assertions as regards matters which are to say the least highly speculative and conjectural. Thus, in the introduction we find an imaginary dialogue entitled “The Genesis of the Book of Job” which according to the table of contents is to be dated about 400 b.c. Apparently the author does not wish to be held responsible for everything in the dialogue or its setting for she uses the saving phrase “in some such way.” Turning to the text of Job, we find the following dogmatic comment on the crocodile passage (xl. 25-xli. 26) : “The Crocodile. Here are three descriptions of him by different writers, each bent on picturing more fully than the last the monster’s insuperable power. All are late, and set in the late second speech of Yahweh.” The dogmatism of this statement would be noteworthy even if it stated a generally
[P000130] 128 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW accepted result of criticism. But such is not the case. According to Driver and Gray in the I.C.C. (Vol. I, p. 352), it is not certain that xl. 15-xli. 34 is composite. If it is, the “safest” view is held to be that xl 25- xli. 3 is to be distinguished from the rest. Buttenwieser whose reconstruction of Job is a very radical one apparently treats the whole passage as a unit. Yet our editor does not hesitate to state categorically that we have here three different descriptions. Similarly, she is sure that Ps. cxviii is “a Te Deutn for the victories of the Maccabean armies” (p. 467), that in the “so-called” Prayer of Hannah there is nothing “suitable to Hannah’s situation and expressed feeling” (p. 368), that the two parts of Psalm xix are “utterly incongrous” (p. 108), etc. As an indication of our author’s attitude toward the supernatural in general and specifically toward prophecy, we note that “The Last Age of Classic Hebrew Literature” (359-C.125, b.c.), has as its last subdivision “Prophecies of the Messiah.” We are told in the Preface that in the Book of Daniel “are given for the first time distinctly, intelligibly and impressively the doctrines of a Messiah, of the Resurrection, and of the final distribution of Justice to all mankind at the Great Assize” (p. xxviii). Then, on the assumption that Daniel is Maccabean and that the idea of a Messiah originated with Daniel, such passages as the following are dated about 145 b.c. : Isa. ii. 2-4, Mic. iv. 1-5, Isa. iv. 2-6, xvii. 7-8, ix. 1-7, xi. 1-9, etc. Similarly we read of other prophetic “snatches of song” (Amos viii. 10-13, ix. 5-6, ix. 8b-iS) that they “presuppose conditions that had not been dreamed of in the days of Amos” (p. 369). So they are relegated to the fourth century. The attitude of the author to the Divine factor in Israel’s history appears clearly in the rather peevish comment on Josh, ib-2: “. . . See, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai and his people and his city and his land. And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst to Jericho and her king; only the spoil thereof and the cattle thereof shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves. Set an ambush for the city behind it.” The comment reads as follows : “P leaves nothing to the initiative of even the greatest leaders. Every slightest action is predetermined and commanded by Yahweh” (p. 536). The Authentic Literature of Israel is misleading because the disintegrating processes by which the documents are carved or in some cases hacked out of the Old Testament text are to a considerable extent covered over and concealed. There is often the appearance of continuity simply because the lacunae are not indicated. Still there is enough to show the attentive reader even though he be not an expert in Old Testament criticism that the process of disintegration is being carried to ever greater extremes. Logically there is no convenient or consistent stopping place. Eventually this method of criticism will prove its own sufficient and conclusive refutation. In the meantime conservative scholars must continue the seemingly thankless task of exposing the absurdities of its methods and of its "assured results.” Princeton. Oswald T. Alus.
[P000131] RECENT LITERATURE 129 Old Testament Essays. By R. H. Kennett. Cambridgee, England: The University Press. 1928. Pp. viii, 280. The volume is made by binding together eight unrelated essays on Old Testament subjects, with an index and Bible references. They are all written from a very liberal view of supposed Biblical history. “Speculative” might be written across the pages. Ezekiel was the father, the architect, of Judaism, while Nehemiah was its builder. In it “the gospel could not germinate.” The Pentateuch is late and the Priesthood as described therein is unhistorical. The altar fire was really a piece of trickery which was credited as coming from God. Elijah on Carmel is an illustration. He was not “scrupulous” as to how he might win the victory over Baal, so he used naphtha as water and fired it by reflection from a sun-mirror, as our author supposes was done in kindling the fire in the temple. The most audacious essay of all is on the Psalms, all of which are placed in the period from 168 b.c. to 141 b.c. Dr. Kennett actually lists each Psalm separately as fitting into a particular time or circumstance of the period. The essay on “The Messianic Hope” is the best in the book but leaves much to be explained. If the “hope” in Israel was as the author portrays, we are not surprised that the Jew rejected Jesus when He came. He rejects all passages that do not picture a divinely appointed ruler, “the Lord’s Annointed” (such are Gen. iii. 15, xlix. 10, and Isa. vii. 7; Isa. ix., Mic. v. 2ff., and Zech. ix. 9 are dated very late). The author places the Apocryphal literature on a par with the Canonical. His attitude towards the prophets is not that they were directly called of God to give his revealed will. The Messianic hope is subjective; revelation is not accredited as playing a part. His Messiah is the modernists’ interpretation of the New Testament Jesus. The author’s great weakness is a false, even unscholarly, treatment of Biblical sources. One example will suffice. Wishing to date the Chronicles late in the second century and Ezra later than Ben Sira, he claims the statement in Ezr. i. 7ff, that Cyrus gave back vessels which had been brought from Jerusalem is false and based on very late Dan. v, because these had been broken up as stated in 2 Kings xxiv. I3ff. Were he fair, he would have noted that the passage he quotes refers expressly to “the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made,” while xxv. ijff., eleven years later, says that many vessels of silver and gold were carried away. Such distortions are inexcusable. Geneseo, III. Willis E. Hogg. Studies in Ancient and Modern Judaism: Selected Writings of Rabbi Isidor Kalisch. Edited and compiled with a Memoir by Samuel Kalisch, Justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey, and an Introduction by Joshua Bloch, Ph.D., Chief of the Jewish Division, New York Public Library. New York: George Dobsevage. 1928. Pp. xvi, 350. In this volume “a modest though representative collection” of the
[P000132] 130 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW writings of Rabbi Isidor Kalisch, who died in 1886, is brought together. Rabbi Kalisch “belonged to that group of men who were instrumental in laying the foundations of Reformed Judaism in America.” There are sixteen articles and a lengthy memorial, the latter written by his son. The first article is entitled “Ancient and Modern Judaism” and a footnote states that it was “delivered at Nashville, Tennessee, in 1874 and soon after in every important city east of the Mississippi River.” At the close of this essay, Kalisch gives what, he tells us, may be considered as “the germ or the second Decalogue of New Judaism.” As it may be of interest to the reader to know the conception of this movement held by one of its leaders half a century ago, we give them in full : I. We believe in an eternal, indivisible and immutable Unity of God who is the primitive source of all, the Father of all mankind, hearing the prayers of all His children without any mediator. II. Man is gifted with an immortal soul to be good and to do good, to love men and God and thus to be contented in the present state of life as well as in the next world. III. The Mosaic religion is capable of infinite progress. IV. The spirit of the Sacred Scripture must be conceived and all and everything that proves itself as temporary and local must be discarded from Judaism. Having acquired a perfect knowledge of the subject, a free inquiry and interpretation may be exercised and the Scriptural text expounded by the common rules of grammar, logic and rhetoric. V. The collection of controversies, discourses and treatises, ordinances, rules and regulations, called the Talmud, is only a source of religious history but is no authority whatever for practical Judaism. VI. All external practices which are not suitable to any salutary influence upon the mind, or are in contradiction to the moral consciousness of the present, are to be cast off. VII. Traditional ceremonies and observances, biblical or non-biblical, are to be altered as soon as their form offends the moral and esthetic feeling of modern civilization. VIII. All effective expedients of establishing a true worship of God, whether of old or modern origin, are to be adhered to. IX. A Messiah who shall lead back the Israelites to Palestine is neither expected nor wished for. The true Israelite considers the country where he was born or where he gained citizenship his Palestine. X. The idea of a Messianic Destiny of Israel is to be retained : Israel’s holy mission is to become the redeeming Messiah of all mankind, teaching and preaching the truth. The above statement makes it abundantly clear how radically Reformed Judaism differs from Orthodox Judaism. It accepts the authority of neither the Old Testament nor the Talmud. The developing religious consciousness or as it is often called “the modern mind” is to be the final authority. Whatever it objects to, whether on ethical, aesthetical or scientific grounds, must be discarded. “Reformed” Judaism might well be called “modernist” or “higher critical” Judaism. It has as little in common with Jewish orthodoxy as Gentile modernism has with Evangelical Christianity. Princeton. Oswald T. Allis.
[P000133] RECENT LITERATURE 131 HISTORICAL THEOLOGY Saint Vincent Ferrier. (1350-1419.) Par Matthieu-Maxime Gorce. Avec une gravure et une carte. Paris: Librairie Plon. Plon-Nourrit et Cie, Imprimeurs-Editeurs. 8, Rue Garanciere— 6 e . Pp. VI, 3<>3- Prix: 12 francs. This book is devoted to the life and work of Saint Vincent Ferrier, one of the notable men of the Roman Church in the period when the Middle Ages were passing into the Modern Epoch. It tells us that he was born in Valencia about the middle of the fourteenth century. How he entered the Dominican order in 1374, and became distinguished for his miracles, his prayers, and his philosophical and theological insight. He lectured in the Universities of Barcelona and Lerida, and wrote his Tractatus de modemo Ecclesiae schismate, dealing with the split over the choice of a pope in 1378. He was in favor of Clement VII, and his treatise gained for him the doctorate in theology. He next devoted himself to preaching with such success that King John I of Aragon made him his counsellor. In 1395 Pope Benedict XIII invited him to become magister sacri palatii in Avignon, but the King of France, Charles VI, imprisoned the Pope, and Ferrier returned to his monastery in Valencia. But the continuing schism weighed heavy on his heart, and in 1399 he undertook that life of wandering preacher which he pursued until his death. Great crowds soon followed him, soon taking the form of a travelling congregation with definite organization and customs. All sorts of extravagances became notable. The flagellants lashed their bare shoulders with knotted cords, at the same time crying out, “In honor of the sufferings of Christ,” or “For the forgiveness of my sins,” or “Lord God have mercy.” More to our liking were the religious hymns composed by Saint Vincent which the procession sang as they passed through the cities and villages. At every spot where this mediaeval salvation army halted the leader preached sermons in which the stress, so we are assured, was more on morals than on dogma, but which never deviated from the doctrine of the Church. He was said to have baptized more than 35,000 Jews, and his itineration extended beyond the borders of Spain into northern Italy and southern and northern France. Wherever he went the tradition says that he worked miracles of healing, of increase of food and wine, of calming tempestuous winds and quenching great fires. His influence on church affairs steadily increased and he was invited to sit in the councils of the Pope. In his last great missionary itineration he would have no more of the Flagellants in his company, and his power greatly augmented. In Nantes he is said to have reached over 70,000 souls. On April 5, 1419, he died at Vannes, where to this day his passing is observed in the Cathedral as a solemn day. He was canonized on June 29, 1455, by Calixtus III. This in brief is the story told in this interesting volume. The author writes under the conviction that history has not done adequate justice to an illustrious figure, who put an end to the great schism in the Roman Church, prepared Spain for unity, pacified Christianity distracted by the hundred years war between England and France, and left permanent
[P000134] 132 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW effects for good upon all of western Europe. The Protestant who attentively reads this volume must gain the impression that in the person of “Maitre Vincent” there was like Francis Xavier a man with a great hunger for souls and a willingness to endure hardship to preach what he considered the saving message to his own generation. Lincoln University, Pa. George Johnson. SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY The Christlike God. A Survey of the Divine Attributes From the Christian Point of View. By Francis John McConnell, one of the Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church. New York, Cincinnati: The Abingdon Press. 1927. Pp. 275. In reviewing any book professedly on the subject of Christian theology, it is well to keep clearly in mind at the outset whether we are dealing with a book on Christian doctrine or one on the philosophy of religion. The present writer, if his memory is not at fault, recollects having read somewhere, in an article by Professor Kirsopp Lake, the statement that if we are to have a science of Christian theology, we must have an authoritative revelation: otherwise we have only a philosophy of religion. So far we agree with Professor Lake. But if this be true, then in Bishop McConnell’s book we have a religious philosophy with what may be called a sentimental attachment to Jesus of Nazareth. That what we have said is true as regards this book can be seen, in the first place, from the fact that the author rejects the rational basis of theistic belief (p. 136) which Christian theologians have subsumed under the category of general revelation. In stating the purpose of the book, moreover, the author states that he is not trying to prove anything. He says that he assumes that God is like Christ and then simply seeks to show where this assumption will lead us in surveying the problems that arise concerning God (pp. 43, 55). In a word he presupposes that God is like Christ, and then, strangely enough, without any clear or critical attempt to tell us what Christ was like, he proceeds at once, assuming the old modern liberal view of Christ, to set forth his own conception of God, apparently forgetting that Jesus was a strict theist and believed in God as the Almighty Creator and Ruler of the universe, and possessed precisely of the so-called metaphysical attributes which the author himself rejects. That this is true can be seen from a careful reading of the chapters on the Unchangeableness, Power, Knowledge, and Omnipresence of God, where their so-called “metaphysical” aspects are denied and these attributes are reduced to their soteriological meaning, after the manner of the Ritschlians. But having made the assumption that we know God only in Christ and having uncritically accepted the modern liberal view of Christ which denies to Him these attributes, the author never stops to investigate critically and thoroughly what was Jesus’ conception of God. That this book is a religious philosophy is seen, secondly, in the
[P000135] RECENT LITERATURE 133 author’s rejection of special revelation in the Bible. The Bible is not the record of God’s self-revelation to man, but of man’s search for God. Thus the author says : “I have no desire to enter a field of controverted criticism, but let us assume that the God of Israel was originally the Deity of Kenites, with special habitation at Sinai. A first stupendous lesson was that this Kenite Deity had power in Egypt, then in the wilderness, then in Palestine, then against Philistines, Assyrians, and Babylonians, and finally over all the earth and heavens. The Hebrews’ conviction of the presence of their God kept pace with their growing knowledge of the world. They could not out-travel their God. They could not get ahead of Him or beyond Him” (pp. 122, 123). Evidently what we have here described is not God’s self-revelation to the Hebrews, but their progressive discovery of God. And in the following paragraph this process of discovery, of human search for God, is said to have continued not only in the New Testament times, but even up till today. When we ask next what is Bishop McConnell’s view of the Bible, we are met at once with the usual and wearisome mistake of confusing the doctrine of plenary inspiration as held by the entire Christian Church, with the mechanical or dictation theory held by some individual theologians. Thus we read : “The fundamental difficulty with the theological party which calls itself fundamentalist is that it seeks to make revelation too easy with its doctrine of an infallibility dictated (italics mine) book. In actual experience, if we take the Book as thus dictated, it is not easy, because of the contradictions in the dictations ; but if we had such a dictated book, sun-clear to the last syllable, we should lose the invaluable benefit of learning how to search out eternal principles, how to show our loyalty to principles when we have to apply them in the dark, or at most in a half-light, how to make ventures with moral truth out upon uncharted seas of change. . . . How one can conceive of God as like Christ and hold to a mechanically dictated revelation from God is a mystery” (pp. 2i4f). Here is utter confusion of thought. In the first place no distinction is made between the revelation of truth and the written record of that revelation. In the second place the author evidently means to attack the high doctrine of plenary inspiration held by the Christian Church, and confounds it with the mechanical dictation theory. But that he does mean to reject all high views of inspiration is perfectly clear from his latest book Humanism and Christianity where he tells us that “The Bible contains many conceptions which are now chaff” (p. S3 ). Enough has been said to show that Bishop McConnell rejects general revelation, special or supernatural revelation, and the doctrine of the plenary inspiration of the Bible which is and has been the doctrine of the Christian Church in all its branches, and which nearly all competent exegetes, both those who accept the doctrine and those who do not, admit to have been the doctrine of Christ and His Apostles about the Bible. Where then is our authority in Christian truth? Bishop McConnell’s view is not left open to doubt. With most all modern liberalism since Schleiermacher he finds it in the Christian consciousness “in Church
[P000136] 134 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW and individual” which “will have to decide whether they [Christian doctrines] are adequate or not” (p. 224). He tells us “that as long as the believer finds in a theory about Christ a statement which makes Christ and God mean most to him, he should not be overkeen to charge another believer with heresy for holding to a different view which, for that other believer, meets the like test of spiritual adequacy.” This is not only subjectivism at its height; it is a species of spiritual pragmatism which must inevitably lead to complete scepticism, and make the question “What is truth?” a mockery. After what has been said, we must confess that our interest flags when we ask what is the author’s view of God and Christ. But we suppose that this is what the reader of this review will wish to know. Many have asked whether Bishop McConnell believes in the Deity of Christ. Briefly stated, the following is a summary of the argument in this book: First, he denies that Christ possesses the metaphysical attributes of God; Second, on the assumption that God is Christlike, he eliminates these same attributes, which make God to be God, from his idea of God; Third, hence God is like Christ as Christ is conceived by modern liberalism (a conception of Christ which has no historical basis) ; Fourth, hence the affirmation of the Deity of Christ is easy for him, not because of an exalted conception of Christ, but because of a low conception of God. It is true that Jesus said to Philip, “he that hath seen me hath seen the Father.” But two things are to be borne in mind. First that Jesus was speaking to His disciples who believed in an Infinite and Almighty God, the Creator and Ruler of the Universe, that is, they had an antecedent and adequate conception of God. Second, Jesus evidently spoke upon the basis of the idea of Incarnation. He was the Word who was with God, and who was God, and who made all things, who “became flesh and dwelt among us, so that we beheld His glory, the glory as of an only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.” And Jesus also said, “Ye believe in God, believe also in me.” Antecedent theistic belief is the condition of belief in a real Incarnation. And if Jesus possessed the so-called metaphysical attributes of Deity, as He certainly did according to the Scripture, and if He was truly man, as He certainly was, then He was God and man, two-natures in One Person, not God in man, much less merely “God’s moral self-expression” as Bishop McConnell conceives Him (p. 225). In an article, “The Two-Natures and Recent Christological Speculation,” the late B. B. Warfield said; “No Two-Natures, no Incarnation ; no Incarnation, no Christianity.” We agree with B. B. Warfield, and so we are compelled to say that Bishop McConnell’s book is an expression of modern liberalism, not of historic Christianity. Here we might well close this review of Bishop McConnell’s book, but we cannot do so without a reference to the Bishop’s rejection of Calvinism where he says that if one is to accept the “old Calvinism with its doctrine of virtually arbitrary sovereignty for God, one will have to hold fast to conceptions which violate morality and common sense, judging the conceptions by any human standards” (p. 153). It would of course
[P000137] RECENT LITERATURE 135 be too much to expect a Methodist Bishop to accept Calvinism. But we shall never understand the God of the Bible if we judge Him by human standards. His ways are not our ways, nor His thoughts our thoughts. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are His ways higher than our ways, and His thoughts than our thoughts. We, for our part, are unwilling to admit that the doctrines of God’s Sovereignty and of Sovereign grace, i.e., the doctrines which distinguish Calvinism from other types of evangelical Christianity, are of any less importance than those doctrines which are held in common by all evangelical Christian Churches, and those doctrines which are held in common by all Christian Churches including the Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox Churches. Rob God of His Sovereignty and you will lose your theism. Deny the doctrines of sovereign grace, and you become inconsistently evangelical, and are on the downward path toward naturalism. If God is not our Saviour from beginning to end of the process of Salvation, we should despair of salvation for ourselves and the world. How anyone can read the grand climax to the eighth chapter of Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, and not be a Calvinist, we are unable to understand. Take away the doctrines of sovereign grace, and the assurance and joy of salvation is lost. Men often say they reject Calvinism, but it is our belief that every Christian heart ascribes to God alone the glory, praise, and thanks for its own salvation. If such be the case, every devout Christian is, at least in his inmost heart, a Calvinist. Princeton. C. W. Hodge. PRACTICAL THEOLOGY Paedagogische Beginselen. Door Dr. H. Bavinck. Derde Druk. Kampen : J. H. Kok. 1928. Pp. 184. De Nieuwe Opvoeding. Door Dr. H. Bavinck. Tweede Druk. Kampen: J. H. Kok. 1928. Pp. 106. These two volumes from the pen of the late Dr. H. Bavinck can conveniently be reviewed together; the latter is an amplification of the former. Dr. Bavinck’s contention is that modern pedagogy is the handmaid of modern philosophy. Herein lies the great value of his writings in the field of pedagogy. He enables us to observe clearly the operation of principles in a mass of details. Even the strongest advocate of Empiricism, Dr. Bavinck shows, must admit that he has a definite starting-point and a definite goal in his educational program. Having shown this to be the case, Dr. Bavinck proceeds to discuss the presuppositions and aims of modern education. Many a method and many an improvement of detail receive from him unstinted praise. Yet, he does not hesitate to assert that the underlying principle of modern pedagogy is humanistic. The starting-point is evolution ; man has descended from a lower type of organisms. Hence moral evil is not sin, but a disfiguring detritus of the seaweeds of the deep. It is clearly
[P000138] 136 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW pointed out how difficult it is, on the basis of such an assumption, to inculcate respect for law. Law is but a man-made ideal possessing no sanction that may be called divine; expediency displaces authority, while the sacred and the secular are merged into one. As to the goal of education, modem pedagogy frankly asserts that it is man. Man being already autonomous in philosophy, in religion, in art and even in morality, it remains only that this autonomy :be recognized the moment you see him in the cradle. Let the child, the babe even, proceed to educate himself. This may seem a strong statement, but it would be hard to prove that Dr. Bavinck has overstated the case. Most modern educators are frankly humanistic. Only they think, or profess to think, that humanism and Christianity are identical. And exactly there lies the mistake. Christian pedagogy has always maintained as its starting-point the creation of man in the image of God, and its goal is not man for the sake of man, but man for the sake of God. Humanism goes back to Greece; barring exceptions, Athens, not Calvary, controls the educational policy of the present day. Education is perhaps the deadliest weapon employed in the struggle between Christianity and humanism. Many Christians seem not to be aware of this fact; at least many of them apparently think it possible that the school should be neutral territory, neither definitely Christian nor distinctly anti-Christian. A change of opinion on this subject has, Dr. Bavinck believes, come about in the last few years. Many Christians are beginning to realize that we must have Christian education from the grade-school to the university if we would truly employ all the means given us for the propagation and defense of the faith. Princeton. C. Van Til. Select Notes on the International Sunday School Lessons, 1929 (Peloubet’s Notes). By Amos R. Wells, Litt.D., LL.D. Boston: W. A. Wilde Company. 1928. Pp. 384. Price $1.90. This volume of notes on the Sunday School lessons for 1929 is the fifty-fifth annual volume issued under the name of Peloubefs Notes. For the last eight years it has been the work of Dr. Wells, who was for twenty years the associate of Dr. Peloubet in the preparation of the book. Because it is increasingly hard to find helps on the Sunday School lessons that can be recommended to the average teacher in the Church School, this volume is particularly welcome. So many of the present-day commentaries on the weekly lessons are like the present-day commentaries on the Bible, calculated to destroy rather than to build faith. An attempt is seemingly being made in some quarters to popularize the flabby liberalism of “Modern Theology’’ by gradually introducing it into the Sunday School. In this attempt Dr. Wells takes no part. It is refreshing and comforting to find a book, so well suited to the needs of the teacher and so true to the Word and the Lord. The author plainly shows his position in this regard in the introduction to the book. “Our Bible classes are not to be classes in ‘comparative religion’ but classes
[P000139] RECENT LITERATURE 137 in The Religion. This is not being narrow-minded and unbrotherly ; it is only being loyal to Jesus Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and being brotherly enough to wish to bring all souls to the one Light of the World.” He goes on to give his estimate of “books which put all religions on the same plane and their founders on an equal level with the Redeemer of mankind, the Son of God. The authors of these books are so desirous of doing full justice to all religious teachers that they do far more than justice to idolatry and superstition and far less than justice to divine revelation and the Incarnation. The result, so far as these books can get any influence, is practical infidelity.” The treatment of the lessons is complete and suggestive. One valuable feature of the book is the manner in which the author combines his notes under the various verses of the lesson, taking up each verse by itself and passing on to the next one. In connection with this, he gives a view of the lesson as a whole and also takes up the portions of Scripture included in the lesson but not printed in the lesson text. Dr. Wells states that his aim is like that of the founder of the work, to make a book of “Select notes.” For that reason a vast number of books have been consulted and quoted, always with scrupulous acknowledgment. A very long bibliography is included as one of the valuable features and a shorter bibliography is given for each lesson. Dr. Wells has been free to use helpful material from whatever source available, but he is careful to point out in his introduction that while he may use a good and suggestive comment from almost any book, that does not mean that he approves all the opinions that the book quoted may contain. This is his principle with regard to the many books consulted and quoted : “Of course it will be understood that we cannot be responsible for all the opinions expressed in their books by all these hundreds of writers. Not all of them are so conservative as we are, and as we think the majority of our readers are. We admit nothing to Peloubetfs Notes, we trust, that is not in absolute accord with the inspired Word of God.” Hobart, N. Y. Joseph A. Schofield, Jr. Know Your Bible ? By Amos R. Wells. Boston: W. A. Wilde Company. 1927. Pp. 135. Price $1.00. This is a book of Bible Questions, arranged in popular style after the manner of many present-day “Ask Me Another” books. It is compiled for the use of parents with their children, of young people together, of Sunday School teachers and of others who desire to obtain a knowledge of Biblical facts by an easy game method. The material in this book would make excellent entertainment for Young People’s socials and can profitably be used in a multitude of ways by those who desire to increase their knowledge of things Biblical while being amused. There are 1500 questions in the volume, and the author says in his introduction that the “entire Bible has been laid under contribution for these questions—every book, almost every chapter and page. No one can be ready with these fifteen hundred answers and not gain a first-rate knowledge of his Bible.” The questions are arranged in groups of fifty each and the
[P000140] 138 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW answers are given in the back of the book. There are also twenty-one topical quizzes which use the same questions and answers. Dr. Wells answers the questions as to the use of such a book of queries by saying: “No use, unless there is use in knowing the Bible, being at home in all parts of it, forming an acquaintance with Bible persons and happenings, becoming able to recognize Bible references in literature, and gradually absorbing the lofty Bible ideals.” And Dr. Wells has no low view of the Sacred Book. He says about it, “You will see in it the summary of rules for success and happiness, peace and prosperity, a perfect guide for social well being, a statesman’s manual, a comprehensive treatise on human life. And at last you will perceive with awe that this is not like other volumes ; that through it God is speaking to you; that its words reach into the eternities and up to the infinite; that its pages acquaint you with the Father, and with his matchless love revealed through his only begotten Son. And so I dare hope for an evangelistic outcome of these questions.” And the author’s final word in his introduction before he prints his questions is this : “In short, the aim of this little book is to furnish recreation in the first place, but in the second place to arouse in the reader so great an enthusiasm for the Book of Books that he will not rest content with the answers to questions, even the answers to so many as fifteen hundred questions, but will go jubilantly on in the pursuit of the Bible knowledge which means the knowledge of the Son of God, the Blessed Redeemer of the World.” Hobart, N. Y. Joseph A. Schofield, Jr. Five World Problems. By Charles E. Jefferson, Pastor of Broadway Tabernacle, New York. New York: Fleming H. Revell Company. Dr. Jefferson has written five readable articles on what he calls the Problems of India, of the Philippines, of China, Japan, and Hawaii. As he spent only two months in China, and a proportionately short time in other countries, his observations are necessarily more or less superficial ; but he wisely disarms criticism by early acknowledging that he does “not know much of the Chinese problem.” Generalizations are always dangerous, and the author has not succeeded in avoiding the danger; as when he says, “A central government is not essential in China.” Again, “I saw plenty of soldiers, but they were all smiling, good-natured farmer boys !” The Chinese have a proverb about “smiling tigers” ! He explains the absence of coal fires in Chinese schools by something to him “indescribably beautiful” in Chinese character, viz., sacrifice of comfort “to secure the higher values of life.” It is not so much a question of the higher values of life as it is of the higher values of coal. For economy’s sake, the Chinese for 4000 years have not heated their houses, but rely on furs and wadded clothing to keep them warm. But we note with satisfaction that the Doctor has perceived some wholesome truths which need to be told. Speaking of the young Nationalists, he says, “They blame all their troubles on outside nations. They make Western Imperialism a scapegoat on which they saddle all the sins of the Chinese people. If Western nations should bring home their gun-
[P000141] RECENT LITERATURE 139 boats, give up all their settlements and extra-territorial privileges, and tear up all of their treaties, the Chinese problem would still remain.” China’s sore spot was touched on in a letter your reviewer lately received from that land, which said: “Most of the ‘heroes’ are drawing $6000 a month salary, and holding down easy chairs in Nanking!” We are glad to see that the author is fair to our U.S. Government, and does not pander to the unreasonable demands of young China; though on the last page he weakens somewhat and is a trifle inconsistent. America has always said to China, “As soon as you can establish a permanent government and keep order, we will gladly accede to your wishes.” But alas ! there has been no government which could speak with authority or carry out the terms of any settlement agreed upon. “You cannot tell one day what is coming on the morrow, and therefore our Government cannot in wisdom recognize either party in a civil war.” A sudden burst of sentimental generosity seems to sweep the author from his moorings when, in conclusion, he expresses the wish that our Government would at once grant what the party now in power in China demands. But is it not wise to wait a reasonable time to see if this party can really maintain itself and perform what it promises to do? Is it kindness to China to act hastily and impose heavy obligations upon her which she will find it difficult, if not impossible, to fulfil? The old Latin saw, “festina lente,” was never more applicable. All true friends of China ought to protest against the present policy she now pursues regarding Mission schools and colleges, requiring the discontinuance of Christian teaching and chapel exercises ; this policy originating under anti- Christian leaders, and inspired by the Russian Communists, is directly contrary to the guarantee of religious liberty given by the Constitution of the Republic, which guarantee our Government should insist on China’s honorably observing: otherwise the great work of Christian education, which has been built up so faithfully during many decades, and to which most of the present Chinese leaders owe their position, will be completely destroyed. One needs constantly to keep in mind that China’s ailment is deepseated,—not social and political, but moral and spiritual. The remedy will never be found in external applications, as expert financing, changing the tariff and making new treaties ; it will be found only in the Gospel of Christ, whose fruits are humility and faith in God, unswerving integrity and self-sacrificing devotion,—out of which our own Republic was born, and by which alone it and China can be preserved. Ventnor, N. J. Henry M. Woods. Deeds Done for Christ. By Sir James Marchant, K.B.E., 'LL.D. New York: Harper & Brothers. 1928. Pp. 335. This useful book has a brief Foreword by the author, and a Prologue, consisting wholly of verses from the Gospels. It is divided into five chapters ; first the noble army of Martyrs, including Polycarp, Origen and Cyprian, two women martyrs, and More, Fisher, Cranmer and Ridley of Reformation days. Chapter II records “Homeland Heroes of the
[P000142] 140 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW Faith,” among whom are Raikes, the founder of Sunday Schools, Guthrie, and Chalmers. Chapter III describes “Heroes in Fields Afar,” including Martyn, Carey, Hudson Taylor, Livingstone, Paton and others. While we would not disparage any faithful worker, some of those mentioned as outstanding leaders are not equal to others who are not included. The names of Griffith John, David Hill, W. A. P. Martin should never be forgotten. Chapter IV gives an account of heroines of the Mission Field, including Mrs. Judson and Mary Slessor. Chapter V is called “Triumphs of Translators.” In this chapter a deserved tribute is paid to the faithful untiring labors of Christian colporteurs who have carried the Word of God all over the Chinese and Indian Empires. One cannot speak too highly of the work of the great British and Foreign and American Bible Societies who through their earnest helpers have sowed the Gospel seed throughout the world. Sir James Marchant is to be congratulated on his work ; more books like this will be welcomed ; for there is nothing more inspiring and helpful than well written Christian biography. Ventnor, N. J. Henry M. Woods. The Gospel of Opportunity. By Charles E. Schofield. New York: The Abingdon Press. $1.25. The possibilities of a life touched and transformed by the power of the Gospel constitute the central thought of these twelve sermons. While Mr. Schofield deals with common things, his book is far from commonplace, and has in it much that is suggestive and stimulating. Apparently a Methodist, it is to be hoped that this young minister will follow in the footsteps of such men as Cookman and Simpson—if he uplifts the atoning Cross, a career of usefulness may safely be predicted. Lincoln University, Pa. Edwin J. Reinke. Unsearchable Riches. By Arno C. Gaebelein, D.D. Publication Office Our Hope, New York. $1.25 postpaid. To say that we have here a popular exposition of the Epistle to the Ephesians, scarcely does full justice to this little work. Dr. Gaebelein is thoroughly familiar with the ground he here traverses, and opens up the riches of this noble apostolic letter in a way that is decidedly instructive and helpful. His discussion of the things most surely believed amongst the early disciples compels him to animadvert repeatedly upon the presentday perversions of the truth; but in view of the portentous nature of what is rapidly assuming the proportions of an actual apostacy, the only comment possible is, O si sic omnes ! The author’s exposition of the sealing of the Spirit (Eph. i. 13, 14) is quite correct, just as on most controverted points he will be found to occupy safe Calvinistic ground. The taking of iroirjfm (p. 7) as practically equivalent to “masterpiece” looks like a case of overstressing, although it is true that in the hands of the classical writers it sometimes means “poem.” The “descent into the lower parts of the earth” (Eph. iv. 9) is rightly separated from the Petrine proclamation (1 Pet. iii. 18), but we do not feel as sure as the author that a ministry in the days of Noah is there intended—though well aware of the strength of the support this view has enjoyed since
[P000143] RECENT LITERATURE HI the days of Augustine. The practical part of the great Epistle (chaps, iv-vi) is, as usual, admirably handled. The printing errors are hardly worth noticing. Lincoln University, Pa . Edwin J. Reinke. Cardinal Ideas of Jeremiah. By Charles E. Jefferson. New York: The Macmillan Co. $2.00. In spite of very obvious defects, this collection of popular studies from the pen of the well-known pastor of the Broadway Tabernacle is a work of real merit. Not only are the ideas selected for discussion of outstanding importance, but the debt owed by the New Testament to the Old is brought out very clearly—a truth that never needed stressing more than in our day. After a chapter or two devoted to the man and the thinker, such themes as the following are handled: Religion is an Affair of the Heart (xvii. 10) ; The Individual is the Key of the World Problem (v. 17) ; The Infinite cannot be Defeated (xviii) ; The Law in the Heart is the Sole Basis of Permanent Reformation (xxxi.) ; A Sick Heart is the Source of the World’s Woe (xvii. 9). The last-named is so able and forcible that we should like to see it printed separately, while other discourses are characterized by clear thinking, frank utterance and avoidance of the claptrap of a superficial optimism. It is, however, when we come to what may be termed the author’s background ideas that we are compelled to part company with him, however much we may realize that he has been misled by those who still sponsor the “assured results” of modern criticism. His assertion, “Jeremiah is not the author of Lamentations” sounds rather magisterial in view of the unanimous voice of tradition, the testimony of the LXX and the Vulgate, Josephus (the language of Lam. iv. 20 answers to what we know of Josiah, not Zedekiah), Origen, the Talmud, etc. (Green)—in other words, in view of the external evidence. This, however, is a comparatively trifling matter. For more serious are such things as the use of the offensive expression “tribal religion” in speaking of the revelation of Jehovah (p. 73). Or take such a statement as this: “The old stories in the Book of Genesis are being given up, not solely by liberals and radicals, but by good, old-fashioned and sensible Christians” (p. 62). If this be so, we fear they will not remain good Christians long, unless Christ was badly mistaken, John v. 46, 47. Or take this passage: “But now the authority of the Bible is denied, and what can the Protestant say? He can say, We do not need any external authority. The seat of authority lies within. . . . Christianity is safe so long as we have the human heart” (p. 65). We have never been able to understand how the logical conclusion of such principles can possibly be evaded—that every man may do that which is right in his own eyes. Why then hang a Guiteau ? Why behead a Schucker of St. Gall ? This is unhappily inconsistent with the doctrine found in chapter vii. Or take the characterizing of the prophets as mere religious geniuses : “The prophet meditated, he brooded, he dreamed, until ... a conviction formed in his soul which was so deep-rooted and solid and vital that he was certain that he had
[P000144] 142 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW come into possession of an idea of God; and in this assurance he came before his countrymen with a message, saying, This is God’s truth !” (p. 34). We suggest that this is not the conception suggested by the words »'3LnTn,nxt, ornnnKi'Nfar less by Peter’s words (1 Peter i. 11). In point of fact, the author himself repudiates it when he comes to speak of predictive prophecy (pp. 20if). The true definition of a prophet unquestionably is, a spokesman for God (Ex. vii. 1), and it ought to give pause to those who speak glibly of “spasms of vindictive frenzy” (p. 18). The above blemishes need not, however, blind us to the solid value of a goodly portion of this book. Biblical exposition is always valuable. We wish Dr. Jefferson had included a chapter on the-longsuffering of Jehovah, as shown by His repeated overtures and offers to a disobedient and gainsaying people. Manasseh’s reign is given (p. 119) as 45 years; both 2 Kings xxi. 1 and 2 Chron. xxxi. 1 make it 55. There is no Hebrew adverb before the word “sick” in Jeremiah xvii. 9 (p. 128). The word EijR contains in itself the meaning “dangerously sick.” There is a bad misprint on p. 126: “You must be borne again.” Lincoln University, Pa. Edwin J. Reinke. Dante’s Conception of Justice. By Allan H. Gilbert, Professor of English in Duke University. Durham, N.C. : Duke University. Pp. 244. $2.50. There is need today, as always, especially on the part of the theologian, of a clear understanding of the nature and necessity of justice in God’s dealings with mankind. Professor Gilbert’s study of Dante’s conception of justice, a conception which underlay the treatment of this majestic theme in the Divina Commedia should be of interest to many. The book will of course be most valuable to those who know their Dante, but an acquaintance with Dante is not indispensable to a profitable reading of the book. As a means of getting at Dante’s conception of justice Professor Gilbert undertakes in the first two chapters a study of the references to justice in Dante’s Convivio as it stands and in the De Monorchia, comparing them with Aristotle’s fifth book of the Ethics, which Dante knew in a Latin version, and with the Commentary on it by Thomas Aquinas. If the reader is inclined to infer from this that these two chapters will be somewhat heavy, he will be surprised to find them delightful as well as very profitable reading. The author has indeed provided a feast of good things for those who enjoy “simple living and high thinking”; here one may enjoy the company of Aristotle, Aquinas, and of the immortal poet himself. Justice, according to Dante, is that “which disposes us to love and practise uprightness in all things.” It has its source in the nature of God. “Inasmuch as Right (or justice) is good, it dwells primarily in the mind of God; and as according to the words, ‘What was made was in Him life,’ everything in the mind of God is God, and as God especially wills what is characteristic of Himself, it follows that God wills Right according as it is in Him. And since with God the will and the thing
[P000145] RECENT LITERATURE 143 willed are the same, it follows further that the divine will is Right itself. And the further consequence of this is, that Right is nothing other than likeness to the divine will. Hence whatever is not consonant with divine will is not right, and whatever is consonant with divine will is right” (p. 45, quoted from Dante’s De Monorchia). Dante’s conception of justice is further revealed in his idea of Adam’s sin which, as the author shows, was “a violation of what was proper to the nature of man, by the desire through pride to make himself equal to God. . . . Adam was guilty of the inordinateness of desiring what was suitable only to God. By thus abandoning his station and violating his nature, he sinned against all humanity. Hence we see that the sin of Adam involves what Dante has often before represented as the very essence of injustice, namely, the failure to occupy the station and enjoy the rewards proper to the person in question. Adam’s sin was that he sought not the highest good of man, but a thing which man could not claim without violating his own God-given nature by aspiring to be something more than human” (pp. I7if.). The last four chapters deal more particularly with Dante’s conception of justice as underlying his treatment of the problem in the Divina Cotntnedia, revealing man under divine government. The four topics are : The Commedia As a Poem of Justice; The Inferno: Justice in The Life of The Wicked; The Purgatorio: Justice in Human Suffering; The Paradiso: The Justice of Variation in Human Talents. Dante’s vision is of God’s justice in dealing with man, the motive force of which is love. The Inferno is a just punishment for the evil and unrepentant life. “Dante is representing evil men as they actually live on earth. By a figure he permits us to see the reality of evil in the lives of ourselves and other men as we go about our business and pleasure. Hence every punishment is an allegory of the evil and unrepentant life the sufferer actually lived ; as no sinner manifests any desire to escape from hell, so men in this world live in satisfaction with their unrighteous lives” (p. 74). In the Purgatorio Dante shows the beneficent effects of human suffering. Here the evil ones receive similar punishment to that in the Inferno, but here they are cleansed of their sins. They are singing and praising God, whereas in the Inferno the inmates are cursing Him. The Paradiso allegorically reveals the rewards of justice to the godly life in the Kingdom of God, where each individual follows his proper bent in due harmony with the whole. Dante is “always certain that the Kingdom of God has its best reality in the heart of man” (p. 142). Huntingdon, Pa. Earl Dubbel. China Her Own Interpreter. Edited by Milton Stauffer, Educational Secretary of the Student Volunteer Movement. New York: The Century Co. Pp. 170. This book consists of eight articles written by Chinese Christians, “interpreting the Christian Movement.” The writers are well educated men, intelligent above the average. All have a fair knowledge, several of them an excellent knowledge, of English. All are graduates of Mis-
[P000146] 144 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW sion Colleges in China, and all except two, later graduated in American universities. Four of the number are Y.M.C.A. secretaries : several are now connected as teachers with Mission Colleges. The subjects and writers of the eight chapters are: “Our Cultural Heritage” by T. C. Chao ; “Our Changing Life and Thought” by L. T. Chen ; “The Status of our Native Religions” by Y. Y. Tsu; “The Contribution of the Western Church” by Wm. Hung; “Problems of the Chinese Church” by C. Y. Cheng; “Cooperation from the West” by David Z. T. Yui; “The Future of Christianity in China” by T. Z. Koo; and “Youth’s Challenge to Youth” by P. C. Hsu. Of these articles we wish, in general, that we could speak in a more commendatory way than is possible. These writings make the critic feel that his lot is not a happy one ; if he tells the truth, he must say things which he would prefer not to say. The book purports to be an “interpretation of the Christian Movement among the Chinese.” It is really, with one or two exceptions, an “interpretation of the Modernist Movement among the Chinese,” for the writers, with perhaps one exception, are Modernists, and mostly of a radical type. The programme proposed for the Chinese Church by them does not make pleasant reading for evangelical Christians. It indicates a movement far removed, in general tendency, from that laid down in the Word of God, and from the course which mission work and Chinese Christian thought have followed for 120 years. Allowance should be made for the fact that China has been passing through a period of intense excitement, that for years she has been subjected to the artful, insinuating propaganda of Russian Communism, by which her leaders were grossly misled, and from the unconscious influence of which it was impossible for good men wholly to escape. One cannot but think that after the writers of these articles have passed through the discipline of sorrow, disappointment and affliction, and have been driven more to their knees, they will realize their mistake and turn from the false lights which now deceive them back to the one True Light, the Living Christ and His unchanging Gospel. One is sorry to note that the book in large part discloses ignorance of what Christianity really is: it is marked often by extreme crudity of view and by a painful lack of humility. It makes prominent what young China, in its lack of experience, thinks, not what the Word of God says; what China desires, not what God says she needs. A favorite expression is the “contribution of the West,” and ‘‘China’s contribution,” as if the content of Christianity in China was to be settled by a kind of barter between East and West, each giving something. They forget that Christianity is God’s Revelation; it stands or falls by this. If it is from God, it is complete : nothing can be added to, or subtracted from it. The Gospel never changes, because God does not change ; it cannot be modified by agreement between East and West. We must accept it as God gives it. Christ is “the same yesterday, today and forever,” and the terms of acceptance are the same for all. There is no “Christ of the Chinese road” or of the “Indian road,” just as in the Apostle Paul’s day there was no “Christ of the Greek road,” nor of the “Syrian road,” nor “Roman
[P000147] RECENT LITERATURE 145 road.” One Christ forever, and the road to Him is the same for all. Hence compromise, syncretism, or adapting the Gospel to the prejudices or likings of any nation is impossible, for that is disloyalty to our Divine Head. Every thought, national as well as personal, must be “brought into captivity” to Him, for national pride and self-will are as destructive to spiritual life as are individual pride and self-will. Christ and His salvation must be taken as the Word of God presents them, and in no other way. This is “the obedience of Christ” (2 Cor. x. 5) to which China, ourselves, and the whole world, must “bring every thought into captivity.” Limited space precludes giving illustrations of many serious errors, into Which the writers, with the best intentions, have fallen. The first article is permeated with Buddhism and Pantheism. As “There is the divine in nature: this is nature-theism” (p. 14). On p. 15, the Chinese “do not possess a gloomy sense of sin, as did the Hebrews of old.” There is nothing that China needs today more than this “gloomy sense” of her sins. “The day will soon come (p. 19) when the divine-human Christ of the West will become the human-divine Jesus of the Chinese people who will understand him and his teachings through the truths that their ancestors long since discovered.” This means the West accepts Christ, as the Bible reveals Him, as the Divine Lord becoming man ; to China, he says, he is the man who became divine, relying not on Bible to teach them, but on what their own ancestors gave. Buddhism pure and simple! for Buddha and all great men become divine by their works. Another says : “Jesus came not to give us a Church, but a way of life!” (p. 156). Did the writer forget Mat. xvi. 18, Acts xx. 28? Another objects to representing Christian life as a warfare! (p. 106). But this is the Scriptural representation, which God has given. If China does not “fight the good fight” against Satan and sin, will she not forever remain in bondage? In January 1927 Dr. Robert E. Speer addressed a missionary convention in Atlantic City. In that address with admirable wisdom and tact, candor and kindness, he dealt with most of the subjects touched upon in this book. We heartily recommend Dr. Speer’s address as excellent reading for ourselves and for our Chinese brethren, especially the authors of this volume. Ventnor, N. J. Henry M. Woods. Religions, Past and Present. By Bertram C. A. Windle. New York: The Century Co. 1927. Pp. 293. In this work there is presented another treatise on that vague and overworked subject—'Comparative Religion. The book is divided into twentythree chapters, comprising every topic supposed to be included under religion. The first chapter deals with religion in general ; the meaning of the term, and the universality of religion : the second presents primitive folk and their supposed ideas of God. Then follow the origin of religion, morals, law, sacrifices, ceremonies, the after life, ancestor worship, animism, mythology, totemism, and polytheism; we are led
[P000148] 146 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW through Hinduism and the so-called Mystery religions, and, with a sigh of relief, close with Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Appended are bibliographical notes on the literature which has been consulted in preparing this treatise, or which is recommended to the reader for further study. It is pleasant to note in the preface that the author expresses his “firm and definite belief in Christianity as the final flower of religion and the revelation of God.” We wish he had made plainer the sharp contrast which ought to be drawn between Christianity and all other religions, showing that the former is the one true religion of Divine origin, a Revelation from God, while all others are human devices, the imperfect work of men, who have “left the fountain of living water, and have hewn out for themselves cisterns—broken cisterns which can hold no water.” The author deserves credit for the diligence he has shown in gathering material for his work. Judging by the number of authorities referred to, he has evidently read widely. But one cannot escape the impression that, after all, the statements of men considered as authorities are mostly mere opinion or speculation, supported by a very meager collection of facts. A remark of Sir Alfred Lyall which the author quotes may well be applied to Comparative Religion in general, and to evolution in particular. “One effect,” he says, “of the accumulation of materials has been to encourage speculative generalizations, because it has provided a repertory out of which one may make arbitrary selection of examples and precedents to suit any theory.” The truth is, the only really profitable way to deal with this subject would seem to be that pursued by Dr. S. H. Kellogg, who studied heathen religions at first hand and wrote from an intimate knowledge of their effects. His work on Comparative Religion, as well as that on Buddhism, though written thirty years or more ago, has never been surpassed. Any one who has lived in heathen lands knows that the difference between theorizing and speculating in one’s arm chair about heathen cults, and coming into actual contact with them, and seeing their woeful failure to supply the spiritual needs of sin-stricken souls, is as great as the distance between the poles. These remarks are in no sense meant to be a reflection on the work of the intelligent author which we are considering, for he handles the subject as well as can be done by one who must be content with the opinions of others, and who does not seem to have had the opportunity of gleaning information for himself in foreign fields. “All’s well that ends well,” however, and the reader rejoices that through the maze of opinions and theories our author emerges unscathed, and gives a welcome testimony to the Gospel of Christ as the one Divine Revelation for the salvation of mankind. He closes with a well deserved rebuke to the theological Smart-Alecks of our day, saying, “One thing is certain, namely, that to attempt to wave Christianity aside as effete and out of date, as the so-called intelligentsia sometimes tries to do, is ridiculous ; for like it or not, it still remains the greatest force in the world today, even if that fact is unacknowledged by many who unwittingly are swayed by it” (p. 286). Ventnor, N. J. Henry M. Woods.
[P000149] RECENT LITERATURE 147 PERIODICAL LITERATURE American Church Monthly, New York, November: Clarence A. Manning, Religion and the Soviets ; C. H. Palmer, Fate of the English Prayer Book; E. Clowes Chorley, Early Preaching in the American Church; Mark Brusstar, John Bunyan. The Same, December: J. G. H. Barry, Revolt of Youth; C. H. Palmer, St. Francis de Sales; Elinor S. Noetzel, Religion and Mental Maladjustment. American Journal of Philology, Baltimore, October: Tenney Frank, Terence’s contribution to Plot-construction; Edwin H. Tuttle, Dravidian “I,” “We” and “You”; Louis H. Gray, On the etymology of certain Celtic words for Salmon ; Emory B. Lease, The ablative absolute limited by conjunctions; J. Clyde Murley, Reflection and Commentary at the beginning of a verse ; L. A. Post, Platonica. Anglican Theological Review, Lancaster, October : Thomas L. Harris, Vital principle of Anglicanism ; William S. Bishop, Is there a New Testament doctrine of “Assumption”?; W. W. Stewart, Mystical Movement in the Middle Ages ; Herbert H. Gowen, Spiritual Movements in the Oriental Religions. Biblical Review, New York, October: C. Bernard Cockett, John Bunyan, pastor and preacher; Alva J. MacClain, Doctrine of the kenosis; H. M. DuBose, Shechem and the historicity of Jacob; William W. Martin, The harper’s lament ; Parke P. Flournoy, The longhidden treasures of Elephantine. Bibliotheca Sacra, St. Louis, October: Melvin G. Kyle, Excavations at Kirjath Sepher; A. William Lewis, Lure of the Gospel Ministry; Herman S. Ficke, Source of Science and Health ; H. W. Magoun, Fads and fancies of philosophy; Gerrit H. Hospers, Doctrine of Justification by faith and the Old Testament. Canadian Journal of Religious Thought, Toronto, November-December: R. P. Bowles, Christian view of suffering; W. R. Taylor, Modern criticism and the Book of Daniel; John Dow, Shadow of the outcast; John Lowe, Christian Doctrine of God—a justification and restatement; John T. McNeill, Catholic Protestantism. Catholic Historical Review, Washington, October: William R. Riddell, Status of Roman Catholicism in Canada ; Edward J. Byrne, The religious issue in National politics ; M. Constance, Spanish rule in the Netherlands under Philip II. Church Quarterly Review, London, October : A. C. Headlam, An appeal to Presbyterians ; R. N. Carew Hunt, Luther’s theory of Church and State; M. E. Sandbach-Marshall, Religious philosophy of Rudolph Otto; E. J. Martin, The sermon as a form of English literature; J. E. Turner, Psychology of repentance and forgiveness; Mrs. Paget, Needed—a ministry of reconciliation. Crozer Quarterly, Philadelphia, October : Edgar S. Brightman, Personalism as a philosophy of religion; Gerald B. Smith, Problem of Authority in Protestantism ; Charles H. Watson, The Changing Christian perspective; I. G. Matthews, Baptist attitude to the Old Testa-
[P000150] 148 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW ment; R. E. E. Harkness, Principles of the Early Baptists of England and America ; Frank G. Lewis, Church and State. Expository Times, Edinburgh, October: W. A. Curtis, Leaders of theological thought—Gustav Adolf Deissmann : J. Battersby Harford, Altars and Sanctuaries of the Old Testament, i; R. C. Gillie, Sermon on Mount—Urgency, stringency and vigilance of Jesus; Herbert G. Wood, Modern Science and the hope of Immortality. The Same, November: J. Battersby Harford, Altars and Sanctuaries of the Old Testament, ii; A. B. D. Alexander, The kingdom of God and the ethic of Jesus; John E. MaoFadyen, The historical method and the preacher, ii. The Same, December : R. S. Franks, Books that have influenced our epoch—Ritschl’s “Justification and Reconciliation”; A. N. Bertrand, Leaders of theological thought—Wilfrid Monod ; J. Battersby Harford, Altars and Sanctuaries of the Old Testament, iii. Harvard Theological Review, Cambridge, October: Kirsopp Lake, Robert P. Blake, and Silva New, The Caesarean Text of the Gospel of Mark. Homiletic Review, New York, October : A. Maude, The centenary of Tolstoy’s birth; R. C. Francis, The minister’s time budget; J. L. Cole, Emerson, to ministers; J. R. Scotford, How much dignity does a minister need?; Once more—Do parents know their children? The Same, November: Thomas A. Smoot, Jesus and his philosophy of truth; John R. Scotford, Politics and the church in South America; H. Brownless, Is the church losing ground?; R. G. Smith, The authority of the Christian Church over the State; Personal evangelism in the same old field. The Same, December: J. F. MacFadyen, Influence of 'Universities in Indian Life; The brain from ape to man; Warner Mesler, What is the future of the country church? Jewish Quarterly Review, Philadelphia, October: D. S. Blondheim, An old Portuguese work on manuscript illumination; J. Leveen, Two autograph letters from a MS. in the British Museum. Journal of Religion, Chicago, October: C. Judson Herrick, The spiritual life; James M. Yard, Christianity in the Chinese laboratory: will it stand the test?; John T. McNeill, Cranmer’s project for a Reformed Consensus; William C. Graham, The Jewish world in which Jesus lived; Oscar A. Marti, Resistance of Scotch-Irish Presbyterians during the Restoration; Ludwig Kohler, Meaning and possibilities of Formgeschichte. Journal of Theological Studies, London, October: Karl Budde, The Sabbath and the Week; John Chapman, Names in the Fourth Gospel; E. C. Ratcliff, The original form of the Anaphora of Addai and Mari ; M. Frost, A prayer book from St. Emmeran, Ratisbon; P. L. Clouchoud, La place du venbe dans Marc; M. R. James, Gospel of Thomas; W. H. Shewring, Prose rhythm in the Passio S. Perpetuae. London Quarterly Review, London, October : E. Lyttelton, The decay of prayerfulness ; W. Bardsley Brash, John Bunyan ; John A. Faulkner, Baptism in the Apostolic Age; Charles J. Wright, Agnosticism
[P000151] RECENT LITERATURE 149 and religion; Ernest J. B. Kirtlan, Shakespeare and life; Frank W. Read, Dumas’ Wandering Jew ; C. Ashlin West, Early Church government in Britain. Lutheran Church Review, Gettysburg and Philadelphia, October : Carl J. Schindler, Demonic Possession in the Synoptic Gospels; Charles L. Venable, Catechization and the catechism ; H. D. Hoover, Preparing the Confirmation Class; W. C. Schaeffer, The Ministry today; J. C. Seegers, The Ministry recruiting the Ministry; A. G. Voight, The Theological Seminary and the doctrine of the Ministry. Missionary Review of the World, New York, October: Johannes du Plessis, Milestones in Africa’s progress; John M. Springer, Are Africans worth saving?; George A. Wilder, Hindrances to Christianity in Africa; Edwin W. Smith, Exploring the African’s soul; A. W. Banfield, Giving the Bible to the African; Elizabeth M. Wilkinson, African Women in the new day; J. T. Tucker, Spiritual self-support in Africa; W. J. W. Roone, Africa waits. The Same, November: Roderick A. MacLeod, A perilous journey from Batang; John N. Wolf, Value of outdoor evangelism; Webster E. Browning, With Stanley Jones in South America; Jesse R. Wilson, Students and Foreign Missions today; Charles H. Sears, Present-day city trend; Herbert Smith, On the edge of African mentality. The Same, December : Robert Laws, Fiftythree years in Africa; Frank B. Lentz, John R. Mott—Christian Statesman; John E. Geil, African leadership for Africa; Timothy T. Lew, Looking through Chinese eyes; S. B. Rohold, A visit to Babylon and its Jews; Calvin Staudt, Preaching in ancient Baghdad; Wilma Duntze, World problems at Budapest. Monist, Chicago, October: L. P. Chambers, Search for certainty; Charles W. Morris, Neo-Pragmatism and the ways of knowing; A. K. Majumdar, A personalistic conception of nature ; Paul Weiss, Relativity in logic; Charles M. Atlee, Egoism; Joseph Ratner, Foundations of Adler’s ethical philosophy; Paul Crissman, Dewey’s theory of the moral good; William F. Clarke, Idea of God in a philosophy of events. Moslem World, New York, October: Ernest W. Riggs, Moslem world from Mt. Olivet; W. H. T. Gairdner, Values in Christianity; Jonas Iwarson, Islam in Eritrea and Abyssinia; A. J. Wensinck, Wine in Islam ; Margaret Doolittle, Moslem religious education in Syria ; Anna Steenstrup, Medical work on the Indian frontier; Pierre Crabites, Mustafa Kemal and his hat ; Ernest Pye, Prayer and mosque attendance in Turkey; T. Khemiri, The Egyptian press today; Daisy E. Phipps, Awakening of Egypt’s womanhood. New Church Life, Lancaster, September : Alfred Acton, Divine government and human freedom of choice ; Ernst Pfeiffer, The New Church in Holland. The Same, October : Richard Morse, First Love. The Same, November: William Whitehead, The New Church and the Modern State; James Pryke, The Church and the World. Review and Expositor, Louisville, October : J. S. Compere, Propagation by Demonstration ; L. O. Lineberger, Solomon, the prodigal prince ;
[P000152] THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW 150 I. G. Murray, A good minister of Jesus Christ; G. S. Dobbins, Missionary significance of the Toronto conference; A. L. Vail, Tentative meditation of the sufferings of God; A. D. Belden, Atonement and Democracy ; A. T. Robertson, Real origin of the Baptist World Alliance ; Owen P. Eaches, Headship of Christ. Union Seminary Review, Richmond, October; J. Gresham Machen, Forty years of New Testament research; Edward Mack, Present state of Old Testament criticism; Egbert W. Smith, Origin and growth of the organized women’s work in the Southern Presbyterian Church ; L. J. Sherrill, Changes in religious education; D. Clay Lilly, Can Christianity control the forces it creates ? ; T. W. Currie, Theological education today; Thornton Whaling, The rights of science; D. M. Allan, The soul and the body in modern psychology; P. P. Flournoy, New Light on the Bible ; W. C. Robinson, Recent theological thought in Germany—theology of Karl Barth. Yale Review, New Haven, September: Kenneth S. Latourette, What is happening to Missions ; Henry S. Harrison, Last days of the devastators ; William L. Phelps, Notes on “The Ring and the Book” ; Arthur M. Schlesinger, Social history in American Literature; George and Philip Welsh, Civil War letters from two brothers. Biblica, Roma, Oct.-Decembri : O. Pretzl, Die greichischen Handschriftengruppen im Buche Josue untersucht; E. Power, The shepherd’s two rods in modern Palestine and in some passages of the Old Testament ; A. Vaccari, II Cantico dei Cantici nelle recenti pubblicazioni ; E. F. Sutcliffe, One jot or tittle; J. M. Bover, Origin del Pentateucho Turonese. Bilychnis, Roma, Ottobre: A. Anagnine, J. B. Bossuet e le correnti religiose e politiche del suo tempo; F. Alderisio, Note sul cristianesimo di Machiavelli; M. Maresca, II problema didattice della religione. The Same, Novembre: U. Moricca, II Codice Casanatense 1338; M. Puglisi, Orientamenti e problemi della cultura contemporanea ; G. C. Teloni, Religione babilonese. The Same, Dicembre: M. de Rubris, Le prime realazieni politiche tra d’Azeglio e Gioberti su documenti inedita; R. Rinaldi, I primi presupposti filosofici della religione di Gioberti. Bulletin de Litterature Ecclesiastique, Toulouse, Juillet-Octobre : Louis de Lacger, La Collection de faux du Conseiller de Masnau et leur auteur presume, le President Sabbathier de la Bourgade. The Same, Novembre-Decembre : Germain Breton, Les Deuils de l’lnstitute Catholique; Louis Desnoyers, Renan historien d’Israel. Ciencia Tomista, Salamanca, Noviembre-Diciembre: Johannes Ude, De organismo septem donorum Spiritus Sancti secundum mentem S. Thomae Aquinatis; Alberto Colunga, Los sentidos del Apocalipsis; M. Cuervo, El deseo natural de ver a Dios y los fundamentos de la Apologetica inmanentista. Estudis Franciscans, Barcelona, Juliol-Desembre : Rafael de Matar6, Del problema de l’abnormalitat mental; Jules d’Albi, Entretien sur l’existence de Dieu; Bartomeu F. M. Xiberta, Una falsa concepcio del
[P000153] RECENT LITERATURE 151 realisme moderat; Hubert Klug, Joannis Duns Scoti doctrina de sacrificio. Etudes Theologiques et Religieuses, Montpellier, Novembre-Decembre : L. de Saint-Andre, La Revision du Prayer Book et la crise de l’Eglise anglicane (suite et fin) ; Jean Barnaut, Quelques remarques sur l’application de la methode historique a l’histoire de l’Eglise ; Ch. Bruston, Encore quelques passages obscurs des Evangiles; L. Perrier, Les stations prehistoriques et la topographie palestinienne. Gereformeerd Theologisch Tijdschrift, Aalten, November: A. Goslinga, De gedachtenisviering van de classis Amsterdam der Nederlandsche Hervormde Kerk; H. W. Van der Vaart Smit, Aangaande den H. Doop. The Same, December : A. C. G. Proosdij, Wet, Kerkenorde en Ambtsgeheim ; J. v. d. Spek, Het vrouwenkiesrecht in de Kerk ; J. Schipper, Jr., Over een predikant-dichter-fabrikant uit de i8de eeuw. Logos, Napoli, Luglio-Settembre : N. Abbagnano, 'La filosofia di E. Meyerson e la logica dell’identita; E. Catalano, Lo spirito, la natura e l’educazione; E. Di Carlo, Nuove richerche bibliografiche intorno a P. Galuppi ; G. Capone-Braga, La dottrina plotiniana delle idee individuali. Niemve Theologische Studien, Wageningen, October; J. Th. Ubbink, Het z. g. verschil tusschen Joh. en de Synoptici ten aanzien van den datum van Jezus’ sterfdag; Th. L. Haitjema, Kerk en Staat. The Same, November : W. J. Aalders, R. Catholicisme op zi jn breedst ; A. van Veldhuizen, Paulus. The Same, December : A. van Veldhuizen, Woordenboeken en encyklopedieen ; J. de Zwaan, Text van het Nieuwe Testament; G. der Leeuw, Uit de Godsdienstgeschiedenis. Nouvelle Revue Theologique, Paris, Novembre: E. Hocedez, L’inhabitation en nous de la Sainte Trinite; L. Malevez, Un mouvement recent de la theologie protestante: l’ecole de Karl Barth; A. Lemaire, La reaction contre la propagande protestante; Jos. Arendt, Note de theologie pastorale: la direction spirituelle des jeunes salaries. The Same, Decembre: Pierre Charles, Les Noirs, fils de Cham le maudit ; Louis Peeters, Une heresie orthodoxe: l’ascetisme; M. de la Taille, Une histoire de la piete; J. Salsmans, La force obligatoire d’une loi probablement illegitime. Onder Eigen Vaandel, Wageningen, October: H. Schokking, De volkomenheid der schoonheid; J. W. Verschoor, Over het “Geloof” bij Brakel en Comrie; Ir. E. Middleberg, Revolutie en feminisme. Recherches de Science Religieuse, Paris, Octobre; Jules Lebreton, La Theorie de la Connaissance religieuse chez Clement d’Alexandrie ; Jean Cal±s, Le Psautier des Montees. Ps. 131 (2) ; Paul Jouon, Notes philologiques sur les Evangiles (suite). The Same, Decembre: Guy de Broglie, Science politique et doctrine chretienne (a suivre) ; Paul Dudon, D’une pretendue tradition secrete de la vie spirituelle des parfaits. Revue d’Ascetique et de Mystique, Toulouse, Octobre: Lettres inedites du P. Jean-Baptiste Saint-jure; M. Viller, Le xvii* siecle et l’origine des retraites spirituelles ; A. Wilmart, Jean de Fecamp: la complainte sur les fins dernieres. Revue d’Histoire Ecclesiastique, Louvain, Octobre: G. Bardy, L’heri-
[P000154] 152 THE PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL REVIEW tage litteraire d’Aetius ; I. Snieders, L’influence de l’hagiographie irlandais sur les Vitae des saints irlandais de Belgique ; H. van Houtte, Une collection de lettres inedites concernant l’Universite de Louvain et le Jansenisme en Belgique. Revue d’Histoire et de Philosophic religieuses, Strasbourg, Septembre- Octobre : Adolphe Lods, Elements anciens et elements modernes dans le rituel du sacrifice israelite; Ch. Guignebert, Quelques remarques sur la perfection et ses voies dans le Mystere paulinien; A. Salomon, La catholicite du monde chretien d’apres la correspondence inedite du comte Louis de Zinzendorf avec le cardinal de Noailles et les eveques “appelants.” Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Theologiques, Paris, Octobre: P. Batiffol, Unite de communion et unanimite de foi; J. D. Labrunie, Les principes de la catholicite d’apres S. Thomas ; J. T. Delos, L’lnternationalisme; E. B. Allo, Orient et Occident; J. Schmidlin, Catholicite et Apostolat missionnaire ; A. D. Sertillanges, Humanite et Catholicite. Theological Study, Tokyo, October: I. Sada, the Formgeschichte as a critical method; Wm. E. Kan, Social Ideas of Jesus and Stoicism; Sohyro Shaku, Christianity of my personal experience. Zeitschrift fur katholische Theologie, Innsbruck, 52:4: Richard von Knapwell, Seine Quaestiones disputatae und sein Quodlibet; A. Eberharter, Der israelitische Levitismus in der vorexilischen Zeit; A. Greiff, Platons Weltseele und das Johannesevangelium ; C. A. Kneller, Zum Christuszeugnis bei Josephus; H. Mang, Der Domgottesdienst in Brixen um 1550. Zeitschrift fur Kirchengeschichte, Gotha, 47:3: R. Abramowski, Zur “Tragodie” des Nestorus; J. F. Laun, Thomas von Bradwardin, der Schuler Augustins und Lehrer Wiclifs; K. Volker, Die Kirchenpolitik der Jagiellonen; K. Schulz, Thomas Miintzers liturgische Bestrebungen; O. Clemen, Schriften und Lebensausgang des Eisenacher Franziskaners Johann Hilten. Zeitschrift fur Theologie und Kirche, Tubingen, 9:5: G. van der Leeuw, Strukturpsychologie und Theologie; J. L. Snethlage, Relativitat und Glaubensgewissheit bei Karl Heim ; A. Dedo Muller, Betrachtungen zu Wunchs Evangelischer Wirtschaftsethik ; Lina Kessler, Zur Bildlichkeit der religiosen Erkenntnis. The Same, 9:6: Carl Clemen, Die Bedeutung der allgemeinen Religionsgeschichte fur die Religionsphilosophie; Karl Heim, Zur Frage der Glaubensgewissheit; Leonhard Fendt, Katholische Theologie der Gegenwarl; Otto Fricke, Gegenwart; Wilhelm Thimme, Die Religion als Lebensform.
[P000155] D. L. MOODY: HIS MESSAGE FOR TODAY By Charles R. Erdman, D.D., LL.D., New York: Fleming H. Revell Company. 1928. Pp. 156. Price, $1.50. “The substance of this volume was given in the form of lectures delivered on the Smyth Foundation at Columbia Theological Seminary, Decatur, Georgia, in March, 1928. It is a pleasure to acknowledge the honour conferred by the faculty of the seminary in their appointment to this lectureship ; and further, it is desired to express deep appreciation for being permitted to present these lectures in this more permanent form.”— (Foreword.) THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE GOSPELS By J. Ritchie Smith, D.D., Professor of Homiletics in Princeton Theological Seminary. Author of “The Teaching of the Gospel of John”; “The Wall and the Gates.” New York: The Macmillan Company, 1926. “Throughout the entire volume one finds unmistakable evidences of broad and accurate scholarship, a courageous facing of difficulties and objections and a determination to think things through, a catholicity of spirit even where the widest differences of convictions enter, and a deep and vital devotion to Jesus Christ. It is with an inexpressible satisfaction one rises from the reading of such a work.”—The Presbyterian. WHAT IS FAITH? By J. Gresham Machen, D.D. New York: The Macmillan Company, Pp. 263. London : Hodder & Stoughton. “If we had the resources we should provide a copy to every minister and lay preacher in the British Isles.” The British Weekly. “Professor Machen has written a strong and courageous book . . —Christian World (London). CHRISTIANITY AND LIBERALISM By J. Gresham Machen, D.D. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1923. “This is a book that should be read by every thinking man, whether he calls himself a conservative or a liberal. While evidently the product of a thorough scholar, it is written throughout in simple, non-technical words.”— S. G. Craig in The Presbyterian.
[P000156] Th e Selected Writings of BENJAMIN BRECKINRIDGE WARFIELD Late Professor of Theology in Princeton Theological Seminary IN TEN VOLUMES At the time of his death in 1921, the late Dr. Benjamin Breckinridge Warfield was the leading Calvinistic theologian in the English speaking world. An Editorial Committee proposes to publish through the Oxford University Press, in a series of volumes, Dr. Warfield’s contribution to theological thought by reprinting the important articles which he contributed to the various Bible Dictionaries and Encyclopedias and to the theological reviews, especially The Princeton Theological Review. The first volume, entitled Revelation and Inspiration , contains two articles on the Idea of Revelation, and a number of exegetical and critical articles on the Biblical idea of Inspiration and the grounds of belief in the plenary inspiration of Scripture. The second volume will contain Dr. Warfield’s major articles on several Biblical doctrines, such as The Trinity, Predestination, Faith, The Person of Christ, etc. The third volume will comprise the historico-critical articles on the Person and Work of Christ. Volumes four, five and six will contain articles on Historical Theology. They will include the articles on Augustine, Calvin, and The Westminster Confession. These articles are authoritative on their respective subjects. The seventh and eighth volumes will contain the articles on Perfectionism. There will be a ninth volume of miscellaneous articles and a tenth volume containing the most important of Dr. Warfield’s book reviews. Volume I, now ready, may be ordered through your bookseller, or direct from the publisher. It is bound in cloth, 8vo (9^x654), PP- xiii+456, price, $3.00. OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS AMERICAN BRANCH NEW YORK
